PACKAGE OF PRACTICES
FOR

CROPS OF PUNJAB

Rabi 2025-26
Vol. 42                                                   August 2025			                    No. 2

PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY
LUDHIANA



The Package of Practices for Crops of Punjab, Rabi 2025-26 contains the latest recommendations 
and readily-usable information provided by the specialists of various departments of PAU through 
the coordination of the Director of Research. These improved farming techniques for stepping up 
productivity of cereals, pulses, oilseeds, sugar, medicinal, spice, aromatic and fodder crops of 
Punjab have been  discussed  and  finalised  in the Research and Extension Specialists Workshop 
held on August 21-22, 2025. It is purposely written in the simple language and easy-to-understand 
style because the recommendations are intended for the use of field level extension workers and the 
farmers of Punjab.

Compiled and edited by
Dr Makhan Singh Bhullar
Director of Extension Education

Dr Amit Salaria
			           Extension Scientist (Agronomy)

IMPORTANT NOTICE
	 The information on performance of recommended technologies given in this book holds 
good only when used under optimal conditions. The performance of the technologies may vary 
with many reasons including weather conditions, soil health, quality and availability of irrigation 
water, management level, negligence, mishandling of recommendations etc. The Punjab 
Agricultural University, Ludhiana accepts no legal responsibility in this regard.

 

Advertisements given are not necessarily the recommendations of the 
Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana

Price per copy	 Rs. 100.00
Subscription for life 	 Rs. 1500.00
Subscription for the Institutions forever	 Rs. 2000.00

All matter published in this package is copyright.
No part of it should be reproduced without the prior permission of Publisher/Editor.

Printed and Published by
 Dr Tejinder Singh Riar,  Additional Director Communication, 

Punjab Agricultural University Ludhiana
adcomm@pau.edu

ISSN 2278-3709				   August, 2025



CONTENTS
		  Pages
1. 	 Cereal Crops	 1-33
	 Wheat	 1
	 Barley	 23
	 Spring Maize	 26
	 Minor Millets	 31
2. 	 Pulse Crops                                                                                                  34-46
	 Gram	 34
	 Lentil	 39
	 Field Pea	 41 		
	 Summer Moong	 42
	 Summer Mash	 45
3. 	 Oilseed Crops                                                                                                47-65
	 Rapeseed and Mustard	 47
	 Linseed	 58
	 Sunflower	 59
4. 	 Sugar Crops                                                                                                   66-86
	 Sugarcane	 66
	 Sugarbeet	 86
5. 	 Medicinal, Spice and Aromatic Crops                                                          87-94
	 Mentha	 87
	 Celery	 91
	 Coriander	 92
	 Fennel	 93
	 Dillseed	 93
	 Honey Plant	 94
	 Fenugreek	 94
6. 	 Fodder Crops                                                                                                 95-105
	 Berseem	 96
	 Oats	 99
	 Ryegrass	 102
	 Shaftal	 103
	 Lucerne	 103
	 Senji	 104
	 Silage Making	 105
	 Hay Making	 105



7. 	 Soil Test Based  Fertilizer Application	 106
8.  	 Organic Farming	 110
9. 	 Multiple Cropping	 126
10. 	 Integrated Farming System	 136
11.   	Spray Technology	 137
12. 	 Management of Rodents and Birds	 139
Appendix- I to IX                                                         ..                 	     143-176
Appendix- I   (A) Minimum Support Prices of Different Crops 	 143
Appendix- I   (B) District-wise Area, Production and Yield of Various           	 144
	                       Rabi Crops, 2023-24                            	
Appendix- II  (A)  Field Standards for Foundation and Certified Seeds 	 147	
Appendix- II  (B)  Seed Certification Standards  for Foundation and Certified Seeds	 148	
Appendix- III       Agricultural Engineering		  149
Appendix- IV       Fertilizer Sources for the Supply of Plant Nutrients	 160	
Appendix- V        Grain Storage and Management of Stored Grain Insects	 161
Appendix-VI        Agricultural Accidents - Preventive and Curative Measure	 163	
Appendix- VII      Antidotes for Pesticides for  Human Beings	 168	
Appendix- VIII     Additional Guidelines for Wheat Cultivation in Paddy Straw	 171
                            Managed Fields
Appendix- IX       Important Telephone Numbers of the Punjab Agricultural University	173
                            	

IMPORTANT NOTE
The chemicals bearing star (*), recommended for the control of weeds, insect-pests and diseases, 
belong to green chemistry with short persistence.



NEW RECOMMENDATIONS

CROP VARIETIES
•	 PBW 872 (Wheat): This variety is recommended for cultivation under 

timely sown irrigated conditions. It matures in 152 days and its average 
grain yield is 24.4 quintals per acre.

•	 PL 942 (Barley): It is a two-rowed malt barley variety suitable for the 
brewing industry. It matures in 146 days and its average grain yield is 20.1 
quintals per acre.

•	 Punjab Cheena 1 (Proso millet): It is a short-duration variety with a 
maturity period of 66 days. Its average grain yield is 3.2 quintals per acre.

•	 Punjab Kangni 1 (Foxtail millet): It is a short-duration variety with a 
maturity period of 76 days. Its average grain yield is 5.1 quintals per acre.

PRODUCTION TECHNIQUES
•	 Wheat: It can be sown directly with Super Seeder under flat/ridge/bed 

planted maize residue conditions. Maize residue incorporation improves 
wheat productivity and soil health.

•	 After final boll picking, in-situ cotton residues incorporation and wheat 
sowing can be done simultaneously using Super Seeder.

•	 In medium textured soils, to prevent crop lodging and its adverse effect on 
quality, apply 25% less nitrogenous fertilizers and reduce one irrigation to 
wheat variety PBW 1 Chapati.

•	 In paddy straw managed fields, apply 55 kg DAP per acre to wheat.
•	 Millets: The crop production technology for the cultivation of proso and 

foxtail millet is recommended.
•	 Summer moong: Under dry conditions, summer moong can be sown in 

wheat straw with Happy Seeder/Smart Seeder, followed by immediate 
irrigation. Under optimum moisture conditions, it can be sown directly using 
a Smart Seeder/Super Seeder. 



•	 Sunflower: Inoculate per acre seed with 250 g biofertilizer (Bacillus aerius 
SLE1 and Pseudomonas putida SRB1) for higher seed and oil yield. 

•	 Ryegrass: A seed rate of 3.0 kg seed per acre is recommended to obtain 
higher fodder yield and quality.

•	 Organic farming (Gobhi sarson): Apply 6 tonnes per acre of FYM at the 
time of sowing. Inoculate per acre of seed with 250 g of biofertilizer (Bacillus 
sp.) for higher seed and oil yield. 

•	 Natural farming: Production technology for summer moong cultivation 
under natural farming is recommended.

•	 Integrated Farming System: Goat farming (9 does+1 buck) component has 
been included in the PAU-IFS model.

PROTECTION TECHNIQUES
•	 Gram: Adopt Bio-intensive Integrated Pest Management (BIPM) module for 

the management of gram caterpillar.
•	 Summer mash: Spray 300 mL per acre of Imazethapyr 10 SL at 15-20 days 

after sowing for the control of grassy, broadleaf weeds and sedges.
•	 Toria, Raya, Gobhi sarson and African sarson: Spray 350 mL per acre of 

Pendimethalin 38.7 CS within 2 days of sowing for effective weed control.

FARM MACHINERY
•	 GNSS- based auto steering system (for precise steering control in tractors) 

and Tractor-operated PAU Turf Manager (for cutting and collecting grass) are 
recommended.

•	 PAU manually operated seeder: It is recommended for sowing of crops like 
peas, radish, turnip, spinach, gram, fenugreek, okra, mustard, millets etc.

Details of above recommendations are provided under different chapters in this book



List of Pesticides Restricted or Banned in the Country
a. Pesticides restricted for use 
1. Aluminium It is to be sold only to government undertakings/ organisations 

phosphide and to be used under strict supervision  of government  experts 
or  Pest  Control Operators.

2. Captafol The use of captafol as foliar spray is banned. It shall be used as 
seed dresser.

3. Cypermethrin Cypermethrin 3% Smoke Generator is to be used only through Pest 
Control Operators and not allowed to be used by General Public.

4. Dazomet The use of Dazomet is not permitted on tea.
5. DDT Restricted for use in public health only.
6. Fenitrothion The use of fenitrothion is banned on Agriculture except for locust 

control in scheduled deseart area and public health
7. Methyl bromide Restriction for its sale and use is similar to that of Aluminium phosphide.
8. Monocrotophos Banned for use in vegetables.
9. Trifluralin Restricted for use in wheat only.

b.  Pesticides banned for use in agriculture in India
1. Aldicarb 15. Endrin
2. Aldrin 16. Ethyl Mercury Chloride
3. Benomyl 17. Ethyl Parathion
4. Benzene Hexachloride 18. Ethylene Dibromide

5. Calcium Cyanide 19. Fenarimol

6. Carbaryl 20. Fenthion

7. Chlorbenzilate 21. Heptachlor

8. Chlordane 22. Lindane (Gamma-HCH)
9. Chlorofenvinphos 23. Linuron
10. Copper Acetoarsenite 24. Maleic Hydrazide
11. DDT 25. Menazon
12. Diazinon 26. Methoxy Ethyl Mercury Chloride
13. Dibromochloropropane (DBCB) 27. Methyl Parathion
14. Dieldrin 28. Metoxuron



29. Nicotine Sulphate 36. Sodium Methane Arsonate
30. Nitrofen 37. Tetradifon
31. Paraquat Dimethyl Sulphate 38. Thiometon
32. Pentachlorophenol (PCP) 39. Toxaphene
33. Pentochloro Nitrobenzene (PCNB) 40. Trichloro acetic acid (TCA)

34. Phenyl Mercury Acetate (PMA) 41. Tridemorph

35. Sodium Cyanide

c.  Pesticide formulations banned for use 
1. Carbofuran   50% SP 3. Methomyl 12.5% L
2. Methomyl  24% L       4. Phosphamidan 85% L

CAUTION

Chemicals used to control insects, diseases and weeds are poisons for 
human beings. Farmers are cautioned to use these poisons carefully to avoid 
any effect on human health. 
•	 Volume of spray material to be used for controlling different insects and 

diseases of various crops is based on the usage of shoulder-mounted 
knapsack sprayer having “fixed type hollow cone nozzle.” Spray volume may 
vary when other types of sprayers/nozzles are used for this purpose.

•	 It should, however, be ensured that the actual amount of pesticides 
recommended in the “Package of Practices” should not be reduced. For 
proper control of weeds, it is always necessary to use flood jet or flat fan 
spray nozzles.



1. CEREAL CROPS
WHEAT

Wheat is a major cereal crop of Punjab. It was grown on an area of 35.16 lakh 
hectares during 2023-24 with production of 181.76 lakh tonnes and average yield of 
51.70 quintals per hectare (20.92 quintals per acre). 

Climatic Requirements: Wheat is a cool season crop. In Punjab, higher 
productivity can be expected if maximum temperature remains within 15-22 & 21-28°C 
and minimum temperature remains within 4-11 & 7-13°C during vegetative & grain 
development stages, respectively. The higher temperature during vegetative stage 
results in poor tillering and early heading. The higher temperature during grain filling 
stage leads to premature ripening and reduction in grain weight. 

Soil Type: Wheat can be grown on all kind of soils, except the highly deteriorated 
alkaline and water-logged soils. Durum wheat should preferably be sown on medium 
to fine textured soils.

Rotations: Rice-Wheat, Rice-Wheat-Summer Moong/Mash, Cotton-Wheat, 
Maize-Wheat, Maize/Rice-Potato-Wheat, Moong/Arhar/Mash-Wheat, Groundnut-
Wheat, Early Fodder-Toria-Wheat, Green Manure-Rice-Wheat, Rice-Pea-Wheat, 
Soybean-Wheat, Summer Groundnut-Potato/Toria/Pea/Late Kharif Fodder-Wheat, 
Summer moong/Green manure-Direct Seeded Rice (DSR)/Direct Seeded Basmati 
Rice (DSBR)-Wheat.
Improved Varieties
A. Timely Sown Irrigated Conditions 

PBW 872 (2025)*: This variety has been recommended for cultivation under timely 
sown irrigated conditions. Its average plant height is 100 cm and matures in about 
152 days. It is moderately resistant to yellow and brown rust. It possesses bold and 
lustrous grains with an average grain yield of 24.4 quintals per acre. This variety is 
suitable for growing under poplar plantation.

PBW 826 (2022): This variety has been recommended for cultivation under timely 
sown irrigated conditions. Its average plant height is 100 cm and matures in about 148 
days. It is moderately resistant to yellow rust and brown rust. It possesses lustrous 
bold grains. Its average grain yield is 24.0 quintals per acre. 

PBW 869 (2021): This variety has been recommended for sowing with Happy 
Seeder/Super Seeder in in-situ rice residue managed fields. Its average plant height 
is 101 cm and matures in about 158 days. It is resistant to brown rust and moderately 
resistant to yellow rust. Its average yield is 23.2 quintals per acre. It possesses bold 
grains and longer coleoptile. Use 45 kg seed per acre.

PBW 824 (2021): Its average plant height is 104 cm and matures in about 156 
days. It is resistant to brown rust and moderately resistant to yellow rust. Its average 
yield is 23.3 quintals per acre. 
* year of release

1



PBW 803 (2021): This variety has been •	 Grow recommended varieties 
recommended for cultivation in South-Western and do not depend upon a 
region of Punjab (Bathinda, Faridkot, Fazilka, single variety. 
Ferozepur, Mansa and Sri Muktsar Sahib). Its 
average plant height is 100 cm and matures in •	 Select varieties according to 
about 151 days. It is resistant to brown rust and the time of sowing.
moderately resistant to yellow rust. Its average •	 Prefer PBW 872, PBW 725 and 
yield is 22.7 quintals per acre. PBW 677 for cultivation under 

Sunehri (PBW 766) (2020): Its average poplar plantation.
plant height is 106 cm and matures in about 155 •	 Avoid cultivation of DBW 222 
days. It is moderately resistant to yellow rust and in sub-mountaneous area.
resistant to brown rust. Its average grain yield is 
23.1 quintals per acre.

DBW 222 (2020): This bread wheat variety has been recommended for cultivation 
in the Punjab state except sub-mountainous regions. Its average plant height is 103 
cm and matures in about 152 days. It is moderately susceptible to yellow rust and 
resistant to brown rust. Its average grain yield is 22.3 quintals per acre.

DBW 187 (2020): Its average plant height is 104 cm and matures in about 153 
days. It is moderately resistant to yellow rust and resistant to brown rust. Its average 
grain yield is 22.6 quintals per acre.

HD 3226 (2020): Its average plant height is 106 cm and matures in about 155 days. 
It is resistant to yellow and brown rust. It possesses good grain quality characteristics. 
Its average grain yield is 21.9 quintals per acre.

Unnat PBW 343 (2017): It is an improved version of PBW 343 and has an average 
plant height of 100 cm. It is resistant to brown rust and moderately resistant to yellow 
rust. It matures in about 155 days. Its average grain yield is 23.2 quintals per acre.  

Unnat  PBW 550 (2017):  It is an improved version of PBW 550, has average plant 
height of 86 cm. It is resistant to yellow and brown rust. It matures in about 145 days. 
It has bold grains and its average grain yield is 23.0 quintals per acre. Use 45 kg seed 
per acre and sow this variety during 2nd to 4th week of November.

PBW 725 (2015): Its average plant height is 105 cm and matures in about 154 
days. It is resistant to yellow and brown rust. Its average grain yield is 22.9 quintals per 
acre. This variety is suitable for growing under poplar plantation.

PBW 677 (2015): Average plant height of this variety is 107 cm and matures 
in about 157 days. It is moderately resistant to yellow and brown rust. Its average 
grain yield is 22.4 quintals per acre. This variety is suitable for growing under poplar 
plantation.

HD 3086 (2015): The average plant height of this variety is 96 cm and matures in 
about 148 days. It is susceptible to new races of yellow rust and moderately susceptible 
to brown rust. Its average grain yield is 23.0 quintals per acre. 
B. Timely Sown irrigated condition (special purpose varieties) 

PBW Biscuit 1 (2024): This is a premium special quality wheat variety suitable 
for making cookies and biscuits as its spread factor is 9.8/10 and has medium soft 

2



grain texture. Its average plant height is 100 cm and matures in about 157 days. It is 
resistant to yellow and brown rust. Its average grain yield is 21.1 quintals per acre. 

PBW Zinc 2 (2023): It possesses higher grain zinc concentration which is good for 
human health. Its average plant height is 100 cm and is resistant to yellow and brown 
rust. Its ears are medium dense with red glumes. It matures in about 154 days. Its 
average grain yield is 23.0 quintals per acre. 

PBW RS1 (2023): This is a premium special quality wheat variety having high 
proportion of resistant starch in the grains. Its average plant height is 87 cm and 
matures in about 146 days. It is resistant to yellow rust and moderately resistant to 
brown rust. Its average grain yield is 17.1 quintals per acre. Consumption of the high 
resistant starch products do not cause spike in blood sugar levels, rather it acts as the 
dietary fibre and thus have low glycemic index. Sow this variety during 2nd to 4th 
week of November.

PBW 1 Chapati (2020): This a premium quality bread wheat variety having 
excellent chapati making properties. Chapati made from it is whitish in color, sweet in 
taste and remains soft even after hours of cooking with good palatability and texture. 
Its average plant height is 103 cm and matures in about 154 days. It is moderately 
resistant to yellow rust and resistant to brown rust. Its average grain yield is 17.2 
quintals per acre. In medium textured soils, to prevent crop lodging and its adverse 
effect on quality, apply 25% less nitrogenous fertilizers and reduce one irrigation to 
wheat variety PBW 1 Chapati.

PBW 1 Zn (2017): It possesses higher grain zinc concentration which is good for 
human health. Its average plant height is 103 cm and is resistant to brown rust and 
moderately resistant to yellow rust. It matures in about 151 days. Its average grain 
yield is 22.5 quintals per acre.   

WHD 943 (2011): It is durum wheat (Wadanak) with an average plant height of 93 
cm and matures in about 154 days. It has low incidence of yellow berry. It possesses 
desirable quality characteristics and suitability for pasta making. It is resistant to yellow 
and brown rusts and less susceptible to leaf blight. It possesses field resistance to 
Karnal bunt disease. Its average yield is 19.8 quintals per acre. 

PDW 291 (2005): It is also durum wheat (Wadanak) with an average plant height 
of 83 cm and matures in about 155 days. It has low incidence of yellow berry and 
possesses suitable for pasta making. It is resistant to yellow and brown rusts, loose 
smut and flag smut and less susceptible to powdery mildew, leaf blight and head scab 
diseases. It possesses field resistance to Karnal bunt disease. Its average yield is 19.4 
quintals per acre.
C. Late Sown Irrigated Conditions

PBW 771 (2020): Its average plant height is 80 cm and matures in about 133 days. 
It is moderately resistant to yellow rust and resistant to brown rust. Its average grain 
yield is 19.0 quintals per acre.

PBW 757 (2020): This bread wheat variety has been recommended for cultivation 
in the Punjab state under irrigated very late sown conditions (January sowing). Its 

3



average plant height is 82 cm and matures in about 114 days. It is resistant to yellow 
rust and brown rust diseases. Its average grain yield is 15.8 quintals per acre.

PBW 752 (2019): Its average plant height is 89 cm and matures in about 130 days. 
Its ears are medium dense with red glumes. It is resistant to yellow and brown rust. Its 
average grain yield is 19.2 quintals per acre.

Agronomic Practices for Irrigated Conditions
Field Preparation

Preparatory tillage: For normal sowing of wheat after paddy and other kharif 
crops prepare the field as under:

(i)  After paddy: 
a.	 Paddy straw retained: When paddy is harvested with combine, the left over 

straw can be  managed using following techniques:
•	 The left over straw can  also  be chopped by using paddy straw chopper cum 

spreader into small  pieces  and the chopped straw can be mixed into the soil by 
tillage operations without any adverse effect on yield of wheat (See Appendix VIII). 

•	 Wheat can also be sown in the combine (fitted with PAU Super SMS) harvested  
fields with ‘Happy Seeder’/‘Super Seeder’/’PAU Smart Seeder’/PAU Surface 
Seeder in the  standing paddy stubbles (See  Appendix VIII).

Incorporation of paddy straw or its retention through Happy Seeder for more than 
three years helps in increasing the wheat productivity and improves soil health. From 
fourth year onwards, 20 kg urea can be saved per acre. In fields where organic 
carbon content of soil comes under high category, after continuous retention/
incorporation of paddy straw, drill 27 kg DAP per acre at sowing.

b.	 Paddy straw removed: The left over straw can be cut by using stubble shaver 
and collected after 2 to 3 days (sun drying) by 
using straw baler. Straw baler collects the straw •	 Harvest paddy with 
and compresses it in the form of bales. In such combine harvester fitted 
fields and in manual harvested paddy fields, if with PAU Super SMS.
the field has enough soil moisture, undertake •	 Do not burn paddy straw.      
tillage straightway, otherwise apply pre sowing •	 In standing paddy stubbles 
irrigation (rauni). Use disc harrow once, followed use Happy Seeder/
by planking. Give another cultivation/ploughing Super Seeder/PAU Smart 
with a cultivator. If the soil is heavy, give one more Seeder/Surface seeding-
cultivation before planking the soil. Tractor drawn cum-mulching for wheat 
cultivator with pulverizing roller-cum-puddler can sowing. 
also be used for preparing the dry seed bed (See •	 Treat the seed as per 
Appendix III “Agricultural Engineering”). recommendations.

(ii) After maize 
Maize residue incorporation : Wheat can be sown directly with Super seeder 

under flat/ridge/bed planted maize residue condition for higher productivity and better 
soil health.

4



(iii)	After Cotton
	 Sowing of wheat after cotton crop through Super seeder: After final boll 

picking, in-situ residue incorporation of cotton plants should be done along with 
sowing of wheat through Super seeder in one go. It improves wheat productivity 
and soil health 
(iv) After other crops: After pre-sowing irrigation (rauni),  give two cultivations/

ploughings followed by planking. Tractor drawn cultivator with pulverizing roller-cum-
puddler can also be used for preparing the dry seedbed.

Time of Sowing: For securing the best grain yield, wheat must be sown at the 
optimum time. First fortnight of November is the optimum sowing time of wheat crop. 
However, sowing   of   long duration varieties can be commenced from the fourth week 
of October to save these from high temperature near maturity. Delayed sowing causes 
a gradual decline in the yield of wheat. A  delay  of  one  week from optimum sowing   
reduces  wheat  yield  by  about  150 kg  per  acre. The following sowing period for 
different varieties may be observed:
Sowing Period Area/Conditions/Purpose   Varieties
From 4th week of Entire state PBW 872, PBW 826, PBW 824, 
October to 4th week Sunehri (PBW 766), DBW 187, HD 
of November 3226, Unnat PBW 343, PBW 725, 

PBW 677 and HD 3086 
Entire state except sub DBW 222
mountainous districts
South Western districts PBW 803
of Punjab
Entire state/ For sowing PBW 869
with happy seeder and 
super seeder
Entire state/ Product PBW Biscuit 1, PBW Zinc 2, PBW 1 
specific   Chapati and PBW 1 Zn

From 2nd week of Entire state PBW RS1 and Unnat PBW 550
November to 4th 
week of November
From 4th week of Entire state/ Product WHD 943 and PDW 291
October to 1st  week specific (Durum 
of November varieties)
From 4th week of Entire state PBW 771 and PBW 752
November to 4th 
week of December 
For first fortnight of Entire state PBW 757
January

Seed Rate: For conventional sowing, use seed rate of 45 kg per acre for PBW 869 
and Unnat PBW 550 and 40 kg for all other varieties. In case of sowing with Happy 

5



seeder, use 50 kg seed per acre for Unnat PBW 550 and 45 kg for all other varieties. 
The seed should be cleaned and graded thoroughly before sowing. 
Seed Treatment: 

a. For Termite: In termite infested soil, treat the seed with 1 g Cruiser 70 WS 
(thiamethoxam) or 2 mL Neonix 20 FS (imidacloprid+hexaconazole) or 4 mL Dursban/
Ruban/Durmet 20 EC (chlorpyriphos) per kg seed and dry it in shade. Seed treated 
with Neonix also control smuts of wheat.

b. For Loose Smut: Treat 40 kg seed with 13 mL Raxil Easy/Orius 6 FS 
(tebuconazole) by dissolving in 400 mL water or   120 g Vitavax Power 75 WS 
(carboxin+tetramethyl thiurum disulphide) or 80 g Vitavax 75 WP (carboxin) or 40 g 
Tebuseed/Seedex/Exzole 2 DS (tebuconazole)  per 40 kg seed. 

c. For Flag Smut: Treat 40 kg seed with 13 mL Orius 6 FS (tebuconazole) by 
dissolving in 400 mL water or   120 g Vitavax Power 75 WS (carboxin+tetramethyl 
thiurum disulphide) or 80 g Vitavax 75 WP (carboxin) or 40 g Tebuseed/Seedex/Exzole 
2 DS (tebuconazole)  per 40 kg seed. 

Treatment should not be done earlier than one month of sowing as it affects seed 
germination. Seed treatment can be done effectively with the seed treating drum.  

d. Seed Inoculation:  Consortium biofertilizer should be applied after a gap of 
at least 6 hours of pesticide treatment to wheat seeds. For application, inoculate 
recommended quantity of seed for one acre with 500 g consortium biofertilizer and one 
litre of water on pucca floor. Let it dry in shade and sow immediately. The use of bio-
fertilizers increases grain yield as well as maintains/improves soil health. These bio-
fertilizers are available with the Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana Seed Shop 
at Gate No. 1 and Krishi Vigyan Kendra/Farm Advisory Service Centres in different 
districts.       
Sowing Method and Spacing
i. 	 Conventional Sowing: Sow wheat with a seed-cum-fertilizer drill at a depth of 4-6 

cm. A spacing of 15-20 cm between the rows gives good yield. Under late sown 
conditions, row spacing should be 15 cm. Calibrate the drill accurately before use. 
For spray of pre-emergence herbicide alongwith sowing, use Lucky Seed Drill. 
(See under Appendix III “Agricultural Engineering”).

	 For hastening the emergence of late sown wheat, sowing of soaked seed is 
beneficial. Soak the seed in water for 4-6 hours and spread it in a thin layer. Sow 
it after 24 hours making the necessary adjustments in the seed drill.

ii. 	 Bi-directional Sowing: In this method use half the recommended quantities of 
seed and fertilizer for sowing in one direction and the remaining half in the other 
direction (across the first direction). Sow the seed a bit shallow i.e. 4 cm deep in 
rows 20 cm apart. The last ploughing in the preparatory tillage can be dispensed 
to reduce extra cost involved in double-sowing. 

iii. 	Raised Bed Sowing: With the help of bed planter, using 30 kg seed per acre, two 
rows of wheat can be sown 20 cm apart on 37.5 cm wide bed with a 30 cm wide 
furrow between two beds. Bed planting ensures efficient use of water and fertilizers 

6



along with reduced weed emergence. Mechanical weed control and application of 
second dose of urea is possible through intercultivation operation (with tractor). 
Entire dose of nitrogen can be applied at sowing before preparing beds. Bed 
planting is beneficial under medium to heavy textured and water logged soils. 

iv.	 Zero Tillage Sowing: Wheat can be sown without any preparatory tillage. In weed 
infested fields, spray  500 mL Gramoxone 24 SL (paraquat) in 200 litres of water 
per acre before sowing to control weeds. Zero tillage/minimum tillage has many 
benefits such as saving in diesel and time, less environmental pollution, saving 
in water during first irrigation, lower weeds infestation particularly Phalaris minor, 
no yellowing of leaves after first irrigation, ensures timely sowing, improved input 
use efficiency and less lodging. Use tractor drawn zero till drill or strip till drill (See 
Appendix III “Agricultural Engineering”) for sowing wheat in unprepared fields. It is  
advisable that  after three years of  continuous  sowing of wheat under zero tillage, 
the field should be ploughed to tackle the problem of perennial weeds or rodents, 
if any. For control of rodents in zero tilled fields, see chapter 12, ‘Management of 
rodents and birds’.

v.	 Happy Seeder or Super Seeder or PAU Smart Seeder Sowing: Use ‘Happy 
Seeder’ or ‘Super Seeder’ or ‘PAU Smart seeder’ machine for sowing of wheat 
in combine harvested paddy fields without straw burning or removal. To ensure 
good moisture at wheat sowing, give last irrigation to paddy crop two weeks before 
harvesting. Sow the crop by keeping depth between 1.5 to 2.0 inch as under:

	 a.	 Ordinary Happy Seeder: The loose straw should be uniformly spread in the 
field before sowing either manually or harvest paddy with combine harvester 
fitted with the PAU-Super SMS.  

	 b.  PAU Happy Seeder: This machine has been upgraded by attaching a press 
wheel assembly with normal happy seeder. This  machine  can be used for 
sowing of wheat in combine harvested paddy fields after cutting and spreading 
of standing stubbles with PAU Straw Cutter-cum-Spreader. This happy seeder 
uniformly place and press the chopped paddy straw in inter row area as a 
mulch, which facilitate better germination, emergence and vigorous initial crop 
establishment. Do sowing with Happy Seeder with 8 inch row spacing for better 
weed control and higher yield.

	 c.	 Super Seeder: Harvest paddy with combine harvester fitted with the PAU 
Super SMS for sowing wheat with Super Seeder.  Wheat seeds can be directly 
drilled into combine harvested paddy fields without any straw burning or 
removal and also in cotton stalks left after final boll picking. Super seeder 
can also be used for in-situ incorporation of wheat residue. 

	 d.    PAU Smart Seeder: Harvest paddy with combine harvester fitted with the PAU 
Super SMS for sowing wheat with PAU Smart Seeder.

Note: 	 In happy seeder sown wheat fields: Follow proper rodent control measures 
(see chapter 12) and apply recommended dose of urea immediately before 
first and second irrigations. In case of sowing with Happy seeder, use 5 kg 
higher seed per acre than that recommended for conventional sowing.

7



 		  Drill 55 kg of DAP per acre at sowing with Happy Seeder or Super Seeder or 
PAU Smart Seeder. Prefer PBW 869 for sowing. For more information, see 
Appendix VIII.

vi. 	Sowing of wheat in standing rice/basmati rice: Medium to heavy textured soils 
which are high in pH and irrigated with higher residual sodium carbonate (RSC) 
water leads to poor infiltration rate. Under these conditions, harvesting of rice/ 
basmati rice gets delayed and this further delays the sowing of succeeding wheat 
crop which decreases its productivity. In such conditions, sowing of wheat can 
be done in standing rice/basmati rice. For this purpose, broadcast 55-60 kg per 
acre of wheat seed in standing rice/basmati rice just before or immediately after 
the last irrigation during 10-25 October. Ensure sufficient moisture content in the 
field before sowing of wheat. Sow long duration wheat varieties recommended 
for timely sowing under conventional system. Ensure uniform distribution of seed 
in the field. Harvest the rice/basmati rice either manually or with combine fitted 
with PAU super SMS. If combine without SMS is used then distribute the lumps 
of loose straw for proper germination and establishment of the wheat crop. Apply 
full dose of recommended phosphorus and half nitrogen with first irrigation and 
remaining half of nitrogen at second irrigation. In case the rain occurs, apply 2nd 
split of nitrogen immediately after the rain. In any case, the 2nd split of nitrogen 
application must be completed within 50–55 days after sowing of wheat. Rest of 
the package is as per conventional sown wheat.

vii. Surface seeding-cum-mulching: It is a low-cost and easy technique for in-situ 
paddy residue management for timely sown wheat. It does not require much costly 
machinery, provides complete mulching and weed infestation is also less. In this 
method, wheat seed and basal fertilizer are uniformly broadcasted in a combine 
harvested paddy field. It is followed by one pass of cutter-cum-spreader which cut 
the whole paddy straw (at 4-5 inch above soil surface). It is followed by irrigation to 
initiate germination of wheat. For sowing one acre, 45 kg wheat seed (treated with 
recommended pesticides) and 55 kg DAP as basal fertilizer are used. 

	 Use ‘PAU Surface Seeder’ for sowing of wheat. It consists of seed & fertilizer 
box attachment, with fluted roller metering system, mounted on to a cutter-cum-
spreader. It is a low cost machine which sow wheat seed and apply basal fertilizer 
in a combine harvested paddy field and cut the whole straw simultaneously. It 
is followed by irrigation. Alternatively, combine harvester fitted with seeding 
attachment which sow wheat and apply basal fertilizer at the time of paddy 
harvest, can be used. It is followed by a single operation of cutter-cum-spreader 
and irrigation. Alternatively, if the above cited machines not available, wheat seed 
and basal fertilizer can be broadcast manually after combine harvesting followed 
by cutter-cum-spreader and irrigation. 

	 Rice field with smaller plot size without excessive soil moisture at the time 
of rice harvest are two pre-requisites for surface seeding. Hence, it must be 
ensured that the field is levelled and divided into smaller plots before rice sowing/
transplanting. The cut-off irrigation before rice harvesting should be done at 
proper time as per recommendation of 15 days and 10 days before harvesting of 
transplanted and direct seeded rice, respectively.

8



Fertilizer Application 
Follow integrated use of organic, bio and chemical fertilizers for higher crop 

productivity and maintenance of soil health as under:
I) Organic Manures
i.	 Farmyard manure (FYM): Apply good quality farmyard manure before sowing 

and  reduce the fertilizer quantity by 2 kg of N and 1 kg of P per tonne of farmyard 
manure. Similarly, where wheat follows potato which received 10 tonnes of 
farmyard manure per acre, no phosphorus and only one-half of the recommended 
nitrogen dose i.e 25 kg N (55 kg urea per acre) need to be applied. 

ii.	 Poultry manure/gobar gas plant slurry/press mud: If 2.5 tonne per acre of 
poultry manure or 2.4 tonne of gobar gas plant slurry after drying was applied 
to rice, reduce the fertilizer N dose in wheat by 25% and fertilizer P dose by 
50%. Apply 37 kg N per acre i.e. 80 kg urea in two equal split doses (at first and 
second irrigation) and drill 75 kg single superphosphate/acre at sowing or apply 
28 kg DAP at sowing and 35 kg urea/acre each at first and second irrigation. If 
pressmud (6 t/acre) has been applied to preceding rice crop, apply 75  kg urea in 
two equal split doses and drill 28 kg DAP or 75 kg SSP per acre at sowing.

iii.	 After leguminous crops: Apply 80 kg urea  per acre in two equal splits.
iv.	 Rice husk ash/Bagasse ash: Apply 4 tonne per acre of rice husk ash or bagasse 

ash to wheat before last ploughing and reduce the dose of phosphorus to one-
half i.e. 12 kg P2O5 (28 kg DAP or 75 kg SSP per acre). In addition to saving 
phosphorus, it improves wheat productivity and soil health.

v. 	 Prali char: Apply 2 tonne per acre prali char to wheat before last ploughing and 
save 35 kg urea per acre. It increases the yield and improves soil health.

II) Bio-fertilizers
Inoculate the seed with bio fertilizers before sowing as per recommendations.  

(See seed inoculation).
III) Chemical Fertilizers 

Apply fertilizer on soil test basis (See Chapter on ‘Soil Testing’). In the absence 
of a soil test, add the following amounts of fertilizers to wheat grown on medium fertile 
soils:

Nutrients (kg/acre) Fertilizers (kg/acre)

 N P2O5 K2O Neem DAP* or   or    Muriate 
coated urea Superphosphate Nitrophosphate* of potash

 50 25 # 110    55  155   125 #

These  nutrients  can  also be  supplied from other  fertilizers available in the market (Appendix IV). 
#  	 Apply 12 kg K2O (20 kg muriate of potash) per acre to soils testing low in potassium and 

apply 24 kg K2O (40 kg muriate of potash) per acre at the time of sowing in the Gurdaspur, 
Hoshiarpur, Rupnagar and Shaheed Bhagat Singh Nagar districts.

* 	 When 125 kg of Nitrophosphate is used, decrease quantity of urea by 50 kg per acre.
9



Time and Method of Fertilizer Application: •	 Use integrated nutrient 
Drill whole of P (55 kg DAP or 155 kg SSP) and management approach 
K (20 kg MOP, if required as per soil test) at through organic, bio and 
sowing. No urea is required at sowing if DAP is chemical fertilizers.
used as source of phosphorus. If phosphorus is 
to be applied through SSP, apply 20 kg urea per •	 Apply 90 kg urea and 55 kg 
acre at sowing. Broadcast 45 kg urea for timely DAP per acre in medium 

fertility soils.
sown crop and 35 kg per acre for wheat crop sown 
after mid December each with first and second •	 Apply potassium to 
irrigation. If second irrigation is delayed due to deficient soils only.
rains, the urea should be broadcasted at 55 days •	 Use PAU-LCC or Green 
after sowing. But, if water stagnates near second Seeker for need based urea 
irrigation, do not broadcast second dose of urea application.
in soil. Instead, give two sprays (criss-cross) •	 Correct the maganese, zinc 
of 7.5% urea solution (15 kg urea in 200 litre and sulphur deficiency in 
water per acre) at 42 and 54 days after sowing. deficient soils.

Fertilizers for wheat sown with different •	 To mitigate the effect of high 
rice straw management practices: Drill 55 kg of temperature at grain filling 
DAP per acre at sowing. Broadcast 45 kg urea per stage, spray potassium 
acre before first and second irrigation. In case of nitrate or salicylic acid as 
Super seeder, urea can be applied either before or per recommendation.
after irrigation. Where wheat has been sown with 
Happy Seeder continuously for 3 years, reduce 20 kg urea per acre from fourth year 
onwards. In fields where organic carbon content of soil comes under high category, 
after continuous retention/incorporation of paddy straw, drill 27 kg DAP per acre at 
sowing.
Need Based Fertilizer Nitrogen Application with ‘PAU-Leaf Colour Chart’ (PAU-LCC) or 
Green Seeker Optical Sensor
•	 In medium fertility soils, drill 55 kg DAP at sowing. 
•	 At first irrigation, apply 40 kg urea per acre for timely sown and 25 kg urea per 

acre for late sown (after mid December) wheat. Before second irrigation proceed 
as under:

i. PAU LCC Method
•	 Before second irrigation (about 50-55 days after sowing), match colour of the 

topmost fully exposed intact leaf of ten representative plants with PAU-LCC under 
shade of your body. 

•	 At second irrigation, apply urea based on leaf greenness of 6 or more leaves out 
of 10 leaves as per following table:

Leaf Colour More than LCC shade LCC shade Less than 
as per PAU-LCC LCC shade 5.0 4.5 to 5.0 4.0 to 4.5 LCC shade 4.0
Urea dose (kg/acre) 15 30 40 55

PAU-LCC is highly beneficial for achieving potential yield with optimum fertilizer 
nitrogen application in conventionally sown wheat as well as wheat sown with different 
rice straw management options.

10



ii. Green Seeker Optical Sensor Method
•	 The over fertilizer nitrogen reference plot of at least 30 sq metre area shall be 

established for the same variety with same date of sowing by applying 55 kg DAP 
+ 45 kg urea per acre at sowing and 65 kg urea per acre at first irrigation. 

•	 Before 2nd irrigation (about 50-55 days after sowing), record reading using Green 
Seeker  optical sensor by keeping it at a distance of 75 cm above the crop canopy 
of the test field and over fertilized reference plot. 

•	 Feed the readings of green seeker for both the plots and age of crop in the ‘PAU-
Urea Guide’ app to know the amount of urea to be applied. 

Note: PAU-LCC/Green Seeker based N application should be ensured at 55 days 
after sowing even if second irrigation is delayed due to rainfall. But, if water 
stagnates near second irrigation, do not broadcast second dose of urea in soil. 
Instead, give two sprays (criss-cross) at 42 and 54 days after sowing. Spray 
7.5% urea solution (15 kg urea in 200 litre water per acre) if leaf greenness is 
equal to or darker than PAU-LCC shade 5.5  or 10% urea solution (20 kg urea 
in 200 litre water per acre) if leaf greenness is less than PAU-LCC shade 5.5.  

	 For the use of LCC and Green seeker, the field should be free from diseases/
insect attack and deficiency of other nutrients.

	 The PAU-LCC is available at PAU, Ludhiana Book Sale Counter at Gate No. 
1, and its Krishi Vigyan Kendras/Farm Advisory Service Centres in different 
districts of Punjab.

Important tips for use of fertilizers 
•	 To the crop sown in kallar soil, apply 25% more nitrogen than recommended. 
•	 To the crop sown after mid December, apply 25% less nitrogen than recommended. 
•	 If full dose of urea has already been applied in soil and crop still shows nitrogen 

deficiency, spray 3% urea solution (9 kg urea in 300 litre water per acre). Spray 
cross wise to thoroughly cover the crop.

•	 Wheat is more responsive to phosphorus application than kharif crops. Hence 
apply phosphorus to wheat and omit its application to following kharif crop. 

•	 In case of non-availability of DAP and SSP in emergent situation, sulphated P 
fertilizer (13:33:0:15::N:P2O5:K2O:S) or ammonium phosphate (12:40:0:10:1:: 
N:P2O5:K2O:S:Zn) may be applied as an alternative source of phosphorus to wheat, 
although it is costly.
Manganese Deficiency: Manganese deficiency generally appears in light soils 

under intensive cropping especially in rice-wheat rotation. The symptoms appear on 
the middle leaves as interveinal chlorosis with light greyish yellow to pinkish brown or 
buff coloured specks of variable size confined largely to 2/3 lower portion of the leaf. 
Later, the specks coalesce forming a streak or band in between the veins which remain 
green (See Plate No. 1, Page No. 177).  In acute deficiency whole of the plant may die. 
At earing stage, the symptoms become prominant on flag leaf. 

11



In manganese deficient soils, give one spray of 0.5% manganese sulphate 
solution (1.0 kg manganese sulphate in 200 litres of water), 2-4 days before first 
irrigation and three sprays afterwards at weekly intervals on sunny days. Do not 
grow durum varieties in sandy soils as these varieties are prone to manganese 
deficiency. Manganese sulphate should be sprayed only as its soil application 
is not profitable.

Zinc Deficiency:  If recommended  dose  of  zinc  sulphate  has been applied 
to the kharif crop, its application may be omitted to the following wheat crop. Zinc 
deficiency symptoms in wheat are stunted and bushy crop with leaves chlorotic in 
the middle, which later break and keep hanging. Apply 25 kg of zinc sulphate (21%) 
per acre which will be enough for 2-3 years. Zinc deficiency can also be corrected 
by foliar spray of 0.5% zinc sulphate (21% zinc). Prepare the solution for spray by 
dissolving 1kg zinc sulphate and 1/2 kg unslaked lime in 200 litres of water. This 
solution is sufficient for spraying an acre of wheat once. Two or three sprays at 15-
day intervals are needed.

Enriching zinc content in wheat grain:  The zinc content in wheat grain (for 
nutritional quality improvement) can be increased by giving one or two sprays of 0.5% 
zinc sulphate heptahydrate (21%) solution from anthesis to early grain development 
stages in the evening hours.

Sulphur Deficiency: Wheat crop suffers from sulphur deficiency when sown 
in sandy soils. The deficiency is more severe when the winter rains continue for 
a long time in the early growth period. The symptoms first appear on the younger 
leaves with fading of the normal green colour. The topmost leaves become light 
yellow except for the tip, while the lower leaves retain green colour for a longer time. 
This is distinctly different from the nitrogen deficiency where the yellowing starts with 
the lower leaves. 

In sulphur deficient soils, where phosphorus has been applied through DAP 
instead of single superphosphate, apply 100 kg of gypsum or 18 kg bentonite-sulphur 
(90%) per acre before sowing to meet the sulphur requirement of the wheat. If 
recommended dose of gypsum was applied to groundnut, apply only 50 kg per acre. 
Gypsum can also be applied in standing crop if deficiency of sulphur is observed.
Weed Control

Weeds can be controlled by two hand hoeings, one before first irrigation and 
second after first irrigation with wheel hand hoe, kasola or khurpa etc. Alternatively, 
weeds can be controlled by the following ways: 
A. Control of grass weeds 
i. Control of Phalaris minor (Gulli danda)

1. Cultural methods: Sow quick growing wheat varieties from last week of 
October to first week of November in narrow rows at 15 cm spacing. In fields having 
severe infestation of this weed, replace wheat with alternate crops like berseem, 
potato, raya and gobhi sarson for 2 to 3 years. Preparation of soil mulch at sowing 
helps in eliminating the first flush of gulli danda.

12



2. Herbicides: Gulli danda can be controlled with use of any of herbicides 
listed below. The herbicides can be applied within two days of sowing or before first 
irrigation or after first irrigation.
Brands (Herbicide) Dose per Time of spray and 

acre amount of water
a. Pre-emergence
Stomp/Dost/Penda/Markpendi/Pendin/Bunker/ 1.5 litre In fields to be 
Zakiyama 30 EC (pendimethalin) sown with Happy 

Seeder, mix any 
Awkira/Momiji 85 WG (pyroxasulfone) 60 g of four herbicides 

with basal dose 
Platform 385 SE (pendimethalin + metribuzin) 1.0 litre of Urea and 
• It also controls broadleaf weeds broadcast just 

before sowing. 
In fields to be 

Daksh Plus 48 EC (pendimethalin + metribuzin) 900 mL sown with any 
• It also controls broadleaf weeds other method, 

spray  any of 
four herbicides 
within two days of 
sowing using 200 
litres of water.

• Good soil moisture for pre-emergence spray is desirable
• ‘Lucky Seed Drill’ can be used for spray of pre-emergence herbicide along with 
sowing of wheat. (See Appendix- III)

b. Post-emergence (Before first irrigation)
Brands (Herbicide) Dose per Time of spray and 

acre amount of water
Arelon/Delron/Hilproturon/ Ronak /Nocilon/ Wonder/ 300 g in light When crop is 
Milron/Agrilon/ Totalon/ Agrilon/ Shivron/Carelon/ t e x t u r e d ; 20 days old and 
Marklon/Jai-roturon/ Isoguard/ Dhar/ Rakshak/ 400 g in weeds are in 2-3 
Prowl/Kanak/ Isotox/ Isohit/ Ciluron/Isocin 75 WP m e d i u m leaf stages, spray 
(isoproturon) t e x t u r e d 2-3 days before 
• Don’t use isoproturon group of herbicides in and 500 g first irrigation, 
areas where there is problem of resistance in heavy using 150 litres of 

t e x t u r e d water
soils

Leader/SF-10/Safal/ Marksulfo 75 WG (sulfosulfuron*) 13 g
• Do not use sulfosulfuron group of herbicides if any 
broadleaf crop is sown in wheat and where jowar/ 
maize to be sown after wheat

13



c. Post-emergence (After first irrigation)

Isoproturon 75 WP:  (All the above formulations of 500 g for all 30-35 days of 
isoproturon mention in ‘b’.) types of soil sowing, using 150 

litre of water
Topik/Point/Moolah/Topple/Rakshak Plus/Jay Vijay/ 160 g
Markclodina/ Columbus 15 WP (clodinafop)

Axial 5 EC (pinoxaden*) 400 mL

Leader/SF-10/Safal/ Marksulfo 75 WG 13 g
(sulfosulfuron*)
• Do not use sulfosulfuron group of herbicides if any 
broadleaf crop is sown in wheat and where sorghum/ 
maize to be sown after wheat

ii. Control of wild oats (Jangli Javi): All the post-emergence herbicides recommended 
for the control of gulli danda also provide effective control of wild oats.
B. Control of broadleaf weeds only:

Broadleaf weeds can be controlled with use of any of below listed herbicides:-
Brands (Herbicide) Dose per Time of spray and 

acre amount of water
2, 4-D sodium salt 80 WP 250 g In timely sown at 
                 or 35-45 days after 
2, 4-D ethyl ester 38 EC 250 mL sowing and in late 
• Use in fields having  bathu, billi booti, jangli hallon,  sown (in Dec) at 
pitpapra, jangli senji, maina, maini, jangli palak 45-55 days after 

sowing, using 150 
litre of water

Algrip/Algrip Royal/Markgrip/Makoto 20 WP (metsulfu- 10 g 30-35 days of 
ron*) sowing, using 150 
• Use in fields having  kandiali palak litre of water

Aim/Affinity 40 DF  (carfentrazone-ethyl*) 20 g 25-30 days of 
• Use in fields having button booti sowing, using  200 

litre of water
Lanfida 50 DF (metsulfuron + carfentrazone*) 20 g 25-30 days of 
• Use in fields having  makoh, kandiali palak, rari/rewari, sowing, using 150 
hirankhuri litre of water
•	 Do not use these herbicides, if any broadleaf crop such as raya, gobhi sarson, gram is 

sown in wheat. 

C. Control of both grass and broadleaf weeds:
Grass and broadleaf weeds can simultaneously be controlled with use of any of 

below listed herbicides:-

14



Brands (Herbicide) Dose per Time of spray and 
acre amount of water

Total/ Markpower 75 WG (sulfosulfuron + metsulfuron*)
• Do not use where sorghum/maize to be 16 g
sown after wheat

Atlantis 3.6 WDG (mesosulfuron + iodosulfuron) 160 g

Shagun 21-11  (metribuzin+clodinafop) 
• Preferably use where there is a problem of multiple 30-35 days of 
   herbicide resistance in gulli danda 200 g sowing, using150 
• Do not use on PBW RS1 and Unnat PBW 550 litre of water
• Do not use on light textured soils
ACM-9/EMEK  (metribuzin+clodinafop) 
• Preferably use where there is a problem of multiple 
herbicide resistance in gulli danda 240 g
• Do not use on PBW RS1 and Unnat PBW 550 
• Do not use on light textured soils
Tank mix of Topik/Point/Moolah/Rakshak Plus/ Jay Vijay/ Recom-
Topple/Markclodina/ Columbus with 2,4-D/ Algrip/Algrip mended 
Royal/Markgrip/Makoto doses as 

per gulli 35-45 days of 
Tank- mix of  isoproturon formulations  and 2,4-D sodium danda and sowing in 150 litre 
salt  or  ethyl ester broadleaf of water
• Only in areas where gulli danda has not evolved weeds 
resistance to isoproturon alone
•	 Do not use above listed herbicides/tank mix, if any broadleaf crop like raya, gobhi 

sarson, gram is sown in wheat. 
D. Integrated weed management: Sowing wheat with happy seeder, in standing rice 
stubbles, significantly reduces weed pressure and soil weed seed bank, particularly of 
gulli danda. Integration of happy seeder with herbicides and hand pulling of escaped 
weed plants improves weed control and deplete soil seed bank further.
E. Weed control in durum wheat: All the above mentioned pre and post-emergence 
herbicides at recommended dose and time can be used for weed control in durum 
wheat, except Total/Markpower/Atlantis/Shagun 21-11/ACM-9/EMEK. Apply 500 g 
of isoproturon group of herbicides at 40-45 days after sowing in medium to heavy 
textured soils and do not use isoproturon on light textured soils.
Useful hints
•	 Spray should be as uniform as possible and on clear days.
•	 After spray, irrigation should be light as heavy irrigation reduces the efficacy of 

herbicides.
•	 After spray, flush the spray pump thoroughly with  water  and  then  with washing 

soda solution (0.5%) to remove traces of herbicides, as contaminated spray pump 
may be phytotoxic when used for spray on other crops. 

15



•	 If raya, sarson or gobhi sarson  is  sown in wheat, use isoproturon, clodinafop or 
fenoxaprop group of herbicides at recommended doses. 

•	 In areas where there is problem of resistance in gulli danda, do not use isoproturon 
group of herbicides.

•	 Use flat fan or flood jet nozzle for pre-emergence herbicides and flat fan nozzle for 
post emergence herbicides.

•	 Change the herbicide group every year to prevent the development of resistance 
in weeds.

•	 Some weed plants may escape after the application of herbicides. These plants 
should be uprooted before they produce seeds. This practice will reduce the weed 
problem in next crop of wheat.

Irrigation
 Sow wheat after a heavy pre-sowing irrigation (10 cm) except when it follows 

rice. In case wheat sowing is likely to be delayed  due to late harvesting of rice, the 
pre-sowing irrigation for wheat can be given to standing rice 5-10 days (depending 
upon soil type) before its harvest except where the crop is to be harvested with 
combine. This practice advances the sowing of wheat by about a week.  For efficient 
use of irrigation water, farmers are advised to make 8 plots (kiaras) per acre in heavy 
textured soils and 16 plots per acre  in light textured soils.

The first irrigation should be relatively light and given after three weeks to October-
sown crop and after four weeks to the crop sown later. The subsequent irrigations are 
also determined by the date of sowing. Observe the following irrigation time-table for 
wheat sown on sandy loam or heavier soils on different dates:

Irrigation (7.5 cm)
Dates of sowing Weeks after the previous irrigation

Second Third Fourth
Up to November 21 5-6 5-6 4
November 22 to Dec. 20 5-6 3-4 2
December 21 to Jan. 15 4 3 2

Note: 	
•	 Advance the date of the first irrigation on light soils and delay it by one week on 

heavy paddy soils.
•	 The indicated intervals for irrigation can be varied by 2 or 3 days on either side.
•	 For each cm of rain, increase the interval for the next irrigation by 5 days upto the 

end of January and by 2 days after this period.
•	 Depending upon the rainfall, irrigate the timely sown crop upto the end of March 

to avoid the harmful effect of unusual rise in temperature at grain filling/formation 
stage. Care should be taken not to irrigate the crop on windy days to avoid lodging.

•	 For the crop sown after December 5, continue irrigation upto  April 10.
•	 For sub-surface drip irrigation in wheat, see chapter on Multiple Cropping 

under maize-wheat-summer moong and cotton-wheat cropping system.

16



Mitigation of effect of high temperature at grain filling and enhancing yield: 
Apply two sprays of 2% Potassium nitrate (13:0:45)  by dissolving 4 kg potassium nitrate 
in 200 litres of water at boot leaf and anthesis stages or two sprays of salicylic acid by 
dissolving 15 gram salicylic acid in 450 mL of ethyl alcohol using 200 litres of water 
per acre at boot leaf and early milk stages to mitigate the effect of high temperature at 
grain filling and enhance the wheat yield. 
Production of Quality Seed 

The farmer can produce quality seed from foundation or certified seed for next 
season. The seed to be used for multiplication must be treated with recommended 
fungicides against loose smut. Remove all off-type and diseased plants at  frequent  
intervals. A single spray of 200 mL of Tilt 25 EC with 200 litre of water per acre is 
recommended to obtain Karnal bunt free seed.  Eliminate the chances of occurrence 
of admixture during harvesting, threshing and storage.
Harvesting and Threshing 

 Harvest and thresh wheat as soon as fully ripe, to avoid grain shattering. Delayed 
harvesting results in high grain losses. Combine harvesters are generally being used 
for simultaneous harvesting and threshing of wheat. Stubbles can be bruised as 
fine wheat straw (turi) by using wheat straw combine. Straw recovery is about 60%. 
Wheat can be harvested manually or by tractor-operated vertical conveyer reaper 
windrowers.  For threshing, use power thresher fitted with proper safety devices to 
prevent accidents. For good performance, operate these machines at recommended 
cylinder speed for wheat and also observe safety precautions against accidents. The 
syndicator type (Toka type) can be used to thresh the wheat crop with moisture content 
up to 20 per cent. For detailed information and instructions on the use of machines/
implements for various operations, see Appendix III  ‘Agricultural Engineering’.
Storage

In case the grain contains more than 10 per cent moisture, it should be dried 
before storing, otherwise it would be spoiled by moulds and excessive heat that 
develops during storage. Seed-cleaners-cum-graders may also be used at this stage 
if the produce is to be used as seed.  See Appendix V for the control of stored grain 
insect pests.
Plant Protection 
(a) Insect Pests

1. Termites damage the crop soon after sowing and near maturity. The damaged 
plants dry up completely and are easily pulled out. The plants damaged at later stages 
give rise to white ears. Treat the seed by diluting 40 g Cruiser 70 WS (thiamethoxam) 
or 160 mL Dursban/Ruban/Durmet 20 EC (chlorpyriphos) or 80 mL Neonix 20 FS 
(imidacloprid+hexaconazole) in one litre of water and spray the same on 40 kg seed 
spread as a thin layer on the pucca ground or tarpaulin or polythene. Seed treated 
with Neonix also control smuts of wheat. Seed treated with insecticide is less attacked 
by birds. Generally, termites cause more damage in sandy soil and irrigating the 
affected fields result in some control of termite damage. In case of severe infestation, 

17



broadcast 7 kg Mortel 0.3 G (fipronil) or 1.2 litre Dursban 20 EC (chlorpyriphos) per 
acre mixed with 20 kg of moist sand before first irrigation. 

2. Aphids damage the crop resulting in discolouration of leaves (See Plate No. 
2, Page No. 177). In case aphid infestation exceeds economic threshold level of 5 
aphids per earheads (recorded from 10 randomly selected ear heads in each of the 
4 quarters of one acre field), give two sprays of 2 litre PAU homemade neem extract 
at weekly interval or single spray of 20 g Actara/Taiyo 25 WG (thiamethoxam) in 80-
100 litres of water per acre using knap sack sprayer or in 30 litres of water per acre 
with power sprayer.
•	 Insecticides should be applied only if the aphid attack appears on earhead stage. 
•	 Since  the  aphids appear  first  on  borders  of  the  crop,  spray  only the infested 

strip to check their further spread.
Method of preparation of neem extract: Boil 4.0 kg terminal parts of the shoots 

of neem trees including leaves, green branches and fruits in 10 litres of water for 30 
minutes. Then, filter this material through muslin cloth and use the filtrate for spraying 
at the recommended dose.

3. Army worm attack usually wheat during March-April, however it is also observed 
in the month of December in fields having large loads of paddy straw. It damages 
leaves and earheads. Spray 40 mL Coragen 18.5 SC (chlorantraniliprole*) or 400 mL 
Ekalux (quinalphos) in 80-100 litres of water per acre with hand-operated knapsack 
sprayer or in 30 litres of water with motorized sprayer. For better effectiveness of 
the insecticide, spraying should be done in the evening when armyworm larvae are 
more active. These insecticides will also control aphids. Alternatively, broadcast 7 kg 
Mortel/Regent 0.3 G (fipronil) or 1 litre Dursban 20 EC (chlorpyriphos) mixed with 20 
kg of moist sand in one acre before first irrigation.

4. Pink stem borer (Sesamia inferens) generally attacks the wheat crop at 
seedling stage. The larva bore into the stem of young plant and kills the central 
shoot causing ‘dead heart’. If the severe damage of pink stem borer is observed in 
previous rice crop, avoid sowing of wheat in the month of October. Prefer to irrigate 
the fields during day time to maximize predation of insects by birds. In case of severe 
infestation, broadcast 7 kg Mortel/Regent 0.3 G (fipronil) or 1 litre Dursban 20 EC 
(chlorpyriphos) mixed with 20 kg of moist sand in one acre before first irrigation. 
Alternatively, spray 50 mL Coragen 18.5 SC (chlorantraniliprole) in 80-100 litre of 
water per acre.

5. Gram pod borer (Helicoverpa armigera) attacks wheat at maturity. It feeds 
on the grains in the earheads. Damage is more where wheat follows cotton. Spray 
800 mL Ekalux 25 EC (quinalphos) in 100 litres of water per acre with hand operated 
knap sack sprayer.

6. Brown mite is a minor insect of wheat causing discolouration of leaves. It is of 
very small size and attack is more observed on rainfed wheat.
(b) Diseases 

1. Yellowing in the seedling stage can be caused by nutrient deficiency, bad 

18



weather conditions, poor drainage, attack of 
Alternaria and Drechslera sp. or soil infestation •	 Grow yellow rust resistant 

wheat varieties especially 
with cereal cyst nematode. in disease prone sub 

A general yellowing of the leaves and necrosis mountainous areas of the 
occurs especially starting from the tips and along state. 
the edges. Later on, necrotic area develops •	 Regularly monitor the 
within the chlorotic tissue, there is stunting and fields from second week 
general decline. In case of zinc deficiency, the of December onward for 
plants remain stunted and bushy; leaves become yellow rust.
chlorotic, stocky and break in the middle. Yellowing •	 Control initial appearance 
of young leaves may be due to sulphur deficiency, of yellow rust in patches 
whereas yellowing of older leaves could be due to to check its further spread.
nitrogen deficiency. •	 To produce Karnal bunt 
•	 In light soil, add 25 kg zinc sulphate per acre. free seed, spray Tilt 25 EC 

One such application will be enough for 2-3 at ear emergence.
years. 

•	 Spray 3% urea solution (3 kg in 100 litres of 
water). To cover the crop thoroughly, spraying may be done cross-wise and a total 
volume of 300 litres of water per acre should be used. 

•	 Give proper irrigation to counteract the effect of frost. Avoid excessive irrigation.
•	 For control of cereal cyst nematode present in the soil, apply 13 kg per acre 

Furadan 3 G at sowing time.
•	 Apply 100 kg gypsum per acre for correcting sulphur deficiency.
2. Wheat rusts: Generally, wheat crop is infested by following rusts

(i) Yellow or stripe rust (Puccinia striiformis f.sp.tritici): Yellow powdery pustules 
appear on leaves, forming stripes (See Plate No. 3, Page No. 177). The disease 
appears first in the sub-mountaineous areas of the state. Minimum temperature in the 
range of 7-13oC coupled with 85-100% relative humidity during night and maximum 
temperature in the range of 15-24oC during day are congenial for infection, development 
and spread of disease. Frequent rains along with wind during February-March may 
further enhance the disease severity and spread. 
Intergrated management of yellow rust: 
•	 Grow rust resistant (PBW Biscuit 1, PBW Zinc 2, PBW RS1, PBW 725, Unnat 

PBW 550, PBW 752, WHD 943, PDW 291 and PBW 660) varieties.
•	 Don’t grow unrecommended varieties especially in sub-mountainous zone.
•	 Do not sow the crop in the month of October particularly in the disease prone sub-

mountainous areas.
•	 Monitor the crop from 2nd week of December onward particularly after irrigation or 

rain to locate the initial foci of infection.
•	 Spray the crop with 300 g Taqat 75 WP (captan + hexaconazole) or Caviet 25 

WG (tebuconazole) or 120 g Nativo 75 WG (trifloxystrobin + tebuconazole) or 200 

19



mL Ampact Extra 25.5 SC (azoxystrobin + cyproconazole) or 200mL Opera 18.3 
SE (pyraclostrobin + epoxiconazole) or 200 mL Custodia 320 SC (azoxystrobin 
+ tebuconazole) or 200 mL Tilt 25 EC/Shine 25EC/Bumper 25 EC/ Stilt 25 EC/
Compass 25 EC/Markzole 25 EC (propiconazole) in 200 litres of water per acre as 
soon as the disease is noticed.

•	 Initially only spot application surrounding infected area should be done.
•	 Regularly monitor the crop and repeat the spray as per need.

(ii) Brown or leaf rust (P. triticina): Round, orange powdery pustules, irregularly 
arranged or in clusters on leaves, less common on the leaf sheath and stalk. 
•	 Grow rust resistant (PBW Biscuit 1, PBW Zinc 2, PBW 824, PBW 869, PBW 803, 

DBW 222, DBW 187, PBW 725, Unnat PBW 343, Unnat PBW 550, PBW 1 Zn, HD 
3226, PBW 771, PBW 757, WHD 943, PDW 291 and PBW 660) varieties.

•	 Spray the crop with 200 mL Tilt 25 EC/Shine 25 EC/Bumper 25 EC/Stilt 25 EC/
Compass 25 EC/Markzole 25 EC (propiconazole) in 200 litres of water per acre as 
soon as the disease is noticed. 
3. Karnal bunt (Neovossia indica): In the ear only a few grains are infected. The 

infected grains on pressing give out black powder of spore mass. This powder gives 
peculiar stinking smell. Grow resistant varieties namely  WHD 943 and PDW 291. A 
single spray of 200 mL Tilt 25 EC (propiconazole) per acre using 200 litres of water at 
ear emergence stage for the control of Karnal bunt is recommended in wheat meant 
for seed production only.

4. Powdery mildew (Blumeria graminis tritici): The fungus develops numerous 
superficial white floury spots on all the above ground parts of the plant. The white 
colour of the floury spots changes to grey or reddish brown when cleistothecia 
develop. Infected plants become stunted due to reduction in the size and number of 
leaves. Spray with 300 g Taqat 75 WP (captan + hexaconazole) or 120 g Nativo 75 WG 
(trifloxystrobin + tebuconazole) in 200 litres of water per acre.

5. Loose smut (Ustilago segetum tritici): The fungus destroys the ears completely, 
turning them into a black loose powdery mass consisting of spores and leaving behind 
the rachis only. 
•	 Grow resistant varieties such as WHD 943 and PDW 291. 
•	 Soak the wheat seed in ordinary water from 8 a.m. to 12 noon on any calm and 

sunny day during May/June. After 4 hours soaking, spread out the moist seed in 
the sun in a thin layer on cemented floor (pucca), on tarpaulin or sheets of cloth. 
Dry the seed completely and store in a dry place till sowing.

•	 Alternatively, the seed may be treated with fungicides as per recommendations.
6. Flag smut or leaf-smut (Urocystis agropyri):  Long narrow lead grey or black 

streaks or stripes running parallel to veins are formed on the leaves. The stripes 
eventually rupture and expose black sooty mass of spores. Practise shallow sowing. 
Rougue out the affected stools and destroy them by burning. Treat the seed with 
recommended fungicides. Varieties WHD 943 and PDW 291 are resistant to this 
disease.

20



7. Head blight or Scab (Fusarium spp.): Individual spikelets or portion of earheads 
show premature bleaching or brown discolouration. Characteristic pinkish mycelium of 
the fungus may be visible on infected spikelets during humid conditions. The grain 
formation is either completely inhibited or the infected spikelets produce shrivelled 
chalky grains showing pinkish discolouration. Seed lots affected by scab should be 
cleaned thoroughly to eliminate shrivelled seeds. The incidence of this disease is 
more on durum varieties, their cultivation in highly humid areas, particularly 
near rivers should be avoided.

8. Leaf blight, glume blight and black tip of grains: Elongated brown spots 
and blotches  appear on leaves and glumes. Ears are poorly filled, grains shrivelled, 
discoloured  and black tipped. Use disease free seed. 

9. Ear cockle (Mamni) and Yellow ear rot (tundu) (Anguina tritici and Rathayi bacter 
tritici): Diseased plants have spreading tendency and swollen base, leaves become crinkled 
and twisted. Earheads contain dark-brown, hard and roundish galls (Mamni) instead of 
grains. Severely diseased plants are stunted and may die at seedling stage. Occurrence 
of yellow, slimy mass indicates ear rot phase which prevents grain and gall formation. 
Put wheat seed in ordinary water and agitate vigorously for few minutes. Ear-cockle 
galls will float to the surface. These may be skimmed off with an ordinary sieve and burnt.

10. Molya (Heterodera avenae): Plants become stunted with yellowing of leaves, 
reduced tillering, absence  of  ears  on  some tillers or small  ears with poorly filled 
grains. The  root system of infected  plants gets reduced in size and becomes bunchy 
with profuse development of   thin rootlets. Cysts (shining white bodies of female 
nematode) are  seen  attached to  the roots  at  the later stage of  the  crop. Expose  
the   soil   to the hot sun by cultivation during May and June. Practise rotation with 
non-cereals in badly infested soils. Apply 13 kg Furadan 3G (carbofuron) per acre at 
sowing time.

(c) Rodents and Birds: See Chapter - Management of Rodents and Birds.

Agronomic Practices for Rainfed Conditions
In Hoshiarpur, Ropar, Sahibzada Ajit  Singh Nagar (SAS Nagar), Shaheed Bhagat 

Singh Nagar (SBS Nagar), Gurdaspur and Pathankot some area under wheat is rainfed. 
The recommendations for raising wheat under such conditions are given below:

Soil: Light textured soil (sandy to loamy sand) usually have low water retention 
capacity and on such soils, wheat followed by maize gives poor yield. For best results, 
green manure with sunhemp or cowpea (fodder) during kharif or keep these soils 
fallow and take a crop of wheat/wheat-gram mixture with raya rows during rabi. The 
fertilizers recommended for wheat also hold good for the above mixed cropping.

Moisture Conservation: Success of rabi crops in rainfed areas mainly depends 
on conservation of moisture in soil profile. The practice is locally known as ‘gil dabna’. 
It consists of ploughing and planking the field immediately after the harvest of kharif 
crop. The field is generally ploughed in the evening and is planked early in the morning.

21



Improved varieties for rainfed conditions
PBW 660 (2014): Its  plant height is 100 cm and matures in 162 days. It has an 

excellent chapati quality. It is resistant to yellow and brown rust. Its average grain yield 
is 17.1 quintals per acre.

Seed Rate: Use 40 kg seed per acre. 
Seed Treatment: Termites cause heavy mortality of plants. Treat the seed with 

recommended pesticides as given under Plant Protection Measures to cover the risk 
of termite attack. 

Time of Sowing: Sow wheat from the last week of October to the Ist week of 
November 

Method of Sowing: Sow crop preferably with a seed-cum-fertilizer drill. In case 
the crop stand is poor, i.e. less than 50 per cent of the optimum and the winter rains 
come before 15th December, re-sow the field.

If the  soil  moisture  is  good  so the crop at a  row-to-row  spacing  of 22-25 cm. 
If the seed zone moisture is inadequate, sow seed slightly deeper in moist soil layer 
(8-10 cm) and increase row spacing to 30 cm.
Fertilizer Application

It pays to apply fertilizer to wheat in rainfed areas provided adequate moisture has 
been stored in the soil profile. In the absence of a soil-test report, apply fertilizer to the 
medium-fertility soils at the following rates:

Nutrients (kg/acre) Fertilizer (kg/acre)
Soil Type N P2O5 K2O Urea Super Muriate 

phosphate of potash
Sandy loam to clay loam soils with 32 16 # 70 100 #
adequate moisture stored
Loamy   sand to sandy soils with low 16 8 ## 35 50 ##
moisture stored

# 	 Apply 12 kg K2O (20 kg muriate of potash) per acre to soils testing low in potassium with 
adequate moisture stored.  

## 	 Apply 8 kg K2O (10 kg muriate of potash) per acre to soils testing low in potassium with low 
moisture stored.

	 These nutrients can also be supplied from other fertilizers available in the market (Appendix 
IV).
Time and method of application: In sandy loam to clay loam soils drill half N and 

full P & K fertilizers at sowing and broadcast remaining half N at winter rains. However, 
in loamy sand to sandy soils drill all fertilizers at sowing.

Interculture: Give two hoeings preferably with improved wheel hand hoe to check 
weed growth and create soil mulch for reducing evaporation from the soil. 

Harvesting, Threshing, Storage and Plant Protection: As mentioned in case of 
Agronomic Practices for Irrigated Conditions.

22



Varieties notified at National (Zonal) level for the North-Western Plains Zone of 
India, including Punjab during last five years

Agronomic conditions/ Varieties
Segment
Restricted irrigation HD 3369 (2022)*, HI 1653 (2022), HI 1654 (2022), DBW 296 

(2021), HUW 838 (2021), NIAW 3170 (2020), HI 1628 (2020)
High input early sown WH 1402 (2024), PBW 872 (2022), DBW 370 (2022), DBW 371 

(2022), DBW 372 (2022), DBW 327 (2021), DBW 332 (2021), 
DBW 303 (2021), DBW 187 (2021), WH 1270 (2021)

Very late sown (1-15 January) HD 3298 (2021), HI 1621 (2020), HD 3271 (2020)
Marker-Assisted selection HD 3406 (2022)
Irrigated timely sown HD 3386 (2024), PBW 826 (2022), DBW 187 (2020), DBW 222 

(2020)
Late sown JKW 261 (2021), PBW 771 (2020)

* year of notification 

BARLEY
In 2023-24, barley was grown on 5.1 thousand hectares in Punjab with a production 

of 19.1 thousand tonnes and average yield of 37.37 quintals per hectare (15.12 quintals 
per acre).

Climatic Requirements: Barley requires cool weather during early growth and 
warm and dry weather at maturity. Being drought resistant, barley suits to areas with 
scanty rainfall.

Soil Type: Barley can be grown on well drained soils. It can do well even in salt 
affected soils during the early phases of the reclamation of these soils.

Rotations: Paddy-Barley, Kharif fodder-Barley, Cotton-Barley and Bajra-Barley.
Improved Varieties (irrigated conditions)

PL 942 (2025): It is a two-row malt barley variety suitable for brewing industry. Its 
average plant height is 101 cm and matures in about 146 days. It possesses lustrous 
bold grains. It possesses desirable grain and malt quality traits such as protein, starch, 
diastatic power, β glucan, free amino nitrogen and malt extract. It is moderately resistant 
to stripe and leaf rust diseases. Its average grain yield is 20.1 quintals per acre.

DWRB 123 (2019): It is a two rowed malt barley variety which matures in 141 
days. It is medium tall variety with 101 cm height. It is a bold seeded variety with 11% 
protein content. It is resistant to major pathotypes of yellow rust, moderately resistant 
to brown rust and tolerant to leaf blight disease. Its average grain yield is 19.4 quintals 
per acre. This variety is particularly suitable for brewing industry. 

PL 891 (2019): It is a two rowed hulless food barley variety. It contains 4 % 
β-glucan content and 12% protein content. β-glucan is helpful in preventing heart 

23



diseases and type-II diabetes. It matures in 144 days. It is medium tall variety with 102 
cm height. It is resistant to major pathotypes of yellow rust, brown rust and leaf blight 
disease.  Its average grain yield is 16.8 quintals per acre. It is a bold seeded variety 
so use 50 kg seed per acre. Hulless barley can be consumed as whole grain cereal, 
barley flakes, barley flour, etc. Barley sattu can be used as energy drinks. 

PL 807 (2009):  It is a six-rowed and feed barley variety which matures in 137 
days. It is fairly resistant to yellow rust, brown rust and leaf blight.  Its average grain 
yield is 17.2 quintals per acre. 

DWRUB 52 (2008):  It is a two-rowed and malt barley variety which matures in 
about 140 days. It is fairly resistant to yellow rust, brown rust and leaf blight diseases. 
Its average grain yield is 17.3 quintals per acre. This variety is particularly suitable 
for brewing industry.

PL 426 (1994): It is a six-rowed and feed barley variety which matures in 124 
days. It is resistant to lodging and yellow rust. It is moderately susceptible to stripe 
disease and aphids. Its average grain yield is 14.0 quintals per acre. 
Agronomic Practices

Preparatory Tillage: Two to three ploughings each followed by planking.
Time of Sowing: Barley gives best results when sown between October 15 to 

November 15. There is a gradual decline in yield when sowing is progressively delayed 
up to the end of December. 

Seed Rate:   Use 35 kg seed per acre under timely sown irrigated conditions.  
For rainfed and late sown conditions, use 45 kg seed per acre. However, for variety  
PL 891, use 50 kg seed per acre.

Seed Treatment: Before sowing, treat the seed with 1.5 g Vitavax 75 WP (carboxin) 
per kg of seed to control covered smut and loose smut in barley. Solar heat treatment 
as recommended for wheat can be done to control the loose smut of Barley.

Method of Sowing: In rainfed areas, crop should be sown by kera if there is enough 
moisture in the soil and by pora if the moisture in the upper soil layer is insufficient. 
Sohaga is run after sowing by kera but not after sowing by pora. Sowing can also be 
done with conventional Seed-cum-fertilizer drill after calibration (See Appendix III). 
Barley can also be grown without any preparatory tillage with zero till drill after rice.  A 
spacing of 22.5 cm for the normal sown crop and 18-20 cm for the late-sown crop is 
recommended.
Fertilizer Application 

Apply fertilizer on soil test basis (See Chapter on ‘Soil Testing’). In the absence of 
a soil test, add following quantities of fertilizers on medium fertility soils:

Nutrients (kg/acre) Fertilizer (kg/acre)
N P2O5 K2O Urea DAP*   or  Superphosphate Muriate  of potash
25    12   #   55 27     75    #

# 	 Apply 6 kg K2O (10 kg muriate of potash) per acre to soils testing low in this nutrient.
* 	 Apply 45 kg urea per acre, if the recommended dose of DAP is to be applied.

24



Time and Method of Fertilizer Application: Drill all fertilizers at sowing. In case 
nitrogen is to be applied in the form of urea, it should be applied just before pre-sowing 
irrigation (rauni).

Zinc Deficiency: Zinc deficiency symptoms are stunted and bushy crop. Apply 10 
kg per acre of zinc sulphate (21%) at the time of sowing in zinc deficient soils. 

Enriching zinc content in grains: The zinc content in grain (for nutritional quality 
improvement) can be increased by giving two sprays of 0.5% zinc sulphate (21%) 
solution in the evening hours at earing and milk stages. Prepare the solution for spray 
by dissolving 1kg zinc sulphate and 1/2 kg unslaked lime in 200 litres of water. 

Weed Control: One hoeing preferably with improved wheel hand hoe should be 
done after the first irrigation.

Irrigation: In the south-western dry districts, two post-sowing irrigations are 
generally required, whereas in other districts, one irrigation from five to six weeks after 
sowing may be enough.

Production of Pure Seed: The foundation seed should be procured from some 
recognised agency. The crop intended for seed production should be given special 
care by removing the off type and diseased plants at frequent intervals. Due attention 
should be paid at the time of harvesting to avoid mixture.

Harvesting: The crop should be harvested immediately after it ripens otherwise it 
might lodge and shatter grain because of wind storms.
Plant Protection
(a) Insect Pests

1. Aphids are the major insect pest of barley. The natural predators (Coccinella 
septempunctata) become active on the appearance of the aphids. 
(b) Diseases

1. Stripe disease (Drechslera graminea): Yellow to brown stripes appear on 
leaves. The plants become stunted and the leaves are shredded. Use disease free 
seed. 

2. Loose smut (Ustilago nuda): The smut sori are enclosed in a fragile membrane 
which soon ruptures, releasing the dark dusty spore mass which is disseminated by 
wind, leaving the naked rachis behind. Treat seed as per recommendations given in 
wheat.

3. Covered smut  (U. hordei): The entire ear, except the awns turn into a black 
compact mass of spores. Treat the seed as per recommendations. Sow the crop late 
and shallow to reduce seedling infection.

4. Yellow rust  (Puccinia striiformis): Yellow pustules appear on leaves, forming 
stripes. When the attack is severe, leaf-sheath, awns and glumes are also affected. 
Grow recommended varieties.

5. Seedling blight, leaf and glume blight (Bipolaris sorokiniana): Infects all the 
parts of the plant. In earlier stages may reduce crop stand. Elongated brown spots 
may be chlorotic, coalescing and may extend to the whole leaves and glumes causing 
blight. Prefer resistant varieties.

25



Varieties notified at National (Zonal) level for the North-Western Plains Zone of 
India, including Punjab during last five years
Agronomic condition/ Segment Varieties
Food Barley - hulless under timely sown ir- PL 891 (2020*)
rigated conditions

Feed Barley - timely sown under irrigated DWRB 137 (2021)
conditions

Malt Barley - timely sown under irrigated DWRB 182 (2021), DWRB 160 (2020)
conditions

* year of notification 

SPRING MAIZE
Cultivation of spring maize is very popular in the districts of Hoshiarpur, Kapurthala, 

Shaheed Bhagat Singh Nagar, Jalandhar and Ropar.
Rotations: Maize-vegetable pea/potato-spring maize 

Improved Varieties 
P 1844 (2019): This hybrid is suitable for spring season cultivation in Punjab. It has 

tall plants and medium broad leaves. Tassel is open and heavy. Ears are long having 
orange flint grains with yellow caps. It matures in about 120 days. Its average yield is 
32.0 quintals per acre.

PMH 10 (2015): Plants of this single cross hybrid are medium tall with medium 
ear placement. Leaves are broad. Tassels are medium in size, semi-open with green 
anthers. Silks are pink in colour. Ears are medium long, conico-cylindrical with attractive 
orange flint grains. It matures in about 120 days. Its average yield is 31.5 quintals per 
acre.

DKC 9108 (2015): Plants are medium   tall with low ear placement. Leaves are 
broad and erect. Tassels are semi-open. Anthers and silks are green. Ears are medium 
long and cylindrical. Grain are dull yellow, semi-dent with caps. It matures in about 122 
days having average grain yield of 32.0 quintals per acre. 

PMH 8 (2014): This hybrid has medium tall plants with medium ear placement. 
Leaves are medium broad and curved. The tassel is open with strongly curved branches. 
The glumes, anthers and silks are green. Pollen shedding and silk emergence are 
synchronous. It has medium sized, conico-cylinderical ears with attractive yellow 
orange flint grains with slight yellow capping. It matures in about 117 days. Its average 
yield is 31.0 quintals per acre.

PMH 7  (2013): This single cross hybrid has medium tall plants with medium ear 
placement. Leaves are medium broad and curved. The tassel is open with strongly 

26



curved branches. Anthers are green. Silks are •	 Treat the seed to control 
green at emergence. Pollen shedding and silk maize shoot fly.
emergence are synchronous. Ears are medium •	 Pollen desiccation may occur 
sized and conico-cylindrical with orange flint due to high temperature in 
grains. It matures in 115 days and its average late sown crop.
yield is 30.0 quintals per acre. •	 Preferably sow the crop on 

PMH 1  (2005): It has tall plants with well southern slope of east-west 
developed root system. The stem has purple ridges/beds by dibbling. 
coloration and is zig-zag and sturdy. The leaves •	 Spray of Atrataf 50 WP upto 
are medium broad. Tassel is open and medium 10 days of sowing effectively 
in size. Ears are medium long with yellow orange manage the weeds.
flint grains. Its average yield is 27.6 quintals per •	 Ensure adequate water 
acre and matures in 118 days. supply during tasseling, 

silking and grain filling 
Avoid cultivation of unrecommended Varieties stage.
P31Y45: This hybrid has medium tall plants with 
medium ear placement and susceptible to post flowering stalk rots.
Agronomic Practices

Land Preparation: Give 4-5 ploughings and plankings to make the seed bed free 
from clods and weeds. Use a mould-board plough, disc-harrow or a cultivator for the 
first cultivation. Biomass incorporator (a modified mould-board plough equipped with 
a clod crusher) can also be utilized for simultaneous pulverization (see Agricultural 
Engineering, Appendix III). Level the field to ensure proper irrigation and drainage.

In light to medium textured soils, if stubbles of the previous crop have been removed 
and there are no weeds, the preparatory tillage can be dispensed with and the crop 
can be sown directly after a pre-sowing irrigation (rauni) or after rain. The practice will 
reduce the cost of cultivation of the crop.

Time of Sowing: Sow the crop during 20 January to 15 February. The crop sown 
after mid February may encounter high temperature stress causing desiccation of 
pollen resulting in poor seed setting.

Seed Rate and Treatment: Use 10 kg seed per acre. For the control of maize 
shoot fly, treat the seed with 6 mL Gaucho 600 FS (imidacloprid) per kg seed. The 
treated seed should be sown within 14 days. 

Method of Sowing: The sowing should be done by dibbling seed preferably 6-7 
cm high on the southern side of 60 cm spaced East-West ridges or 67.5 cm spaced 
beds for early emergence and good vigour. Keep plant to plant spacing of 20 cm in 
case of ridge planting and 18 cm in case of bed planting. For bed preparation the 
wheat bed planter should be used and it saves the irrigation water.

Thinning: If the plant population is higher than recommended, remove the excess 
plants so as to have plant-to-plant distance of about 20 cm. Thinning may be carried 
out with first hoeing or earlier.

27



Fertilizer Application 
Apply 6 tonnes of good quality farmyard manure per acre  to the maize crop year 

after year and omit the application of phosphorous, potassium, zinc and nitrogen 
recommended as basal dose. Application of nitrogen fertilizer more than recommended 
dose is no substitute for FYM.

Apply  fertilizer  on  soil  test basis. In the absence of a soil test, apply the following 
amounts of inorganic fertilizers.

Nutrients Fertilizers (kg/acre)
Varieties (kg/acre)

N P2O5 K2O Urea DAP*    or     Super or      Nitro- Muriate
phosphate Phosphate* of 

Potash
P 1844, PMH  50 24 # 110 55 150 125 #
10, DKC 9108, 
PMH 8, PMH 1

PMH 7  35 12  ##  75 27 75 62 ##

# 	 Apply 12 kg K2O (20 kg muriate of potash) per acre to soils testing low in this nutrient.
## 	 Apply 8 kg K2O (15 kg muriate of potash) per acre to soils testing low in this nutrient.
* 	 Apply 90 kg urea per acre, if 55 kg DAP is used. Similarly, apply 65 kg urea per acre if 

27 kg DAP is used for respective varieties. Apply 60/50 kg urea per acre if 125/62 kg 
nitrophosphate is used respectively for different varieties.
Drill one third of nitrogen and the entire quantity of phosphorous and potassium 

at the time of sowing. If nitrophosphate is used omit urea application at sowing. Top 
dress one third of nitrogen at the knee-high stage and the remaining one third at the 
pre tasseling stage. 

Zinc Deficiency: In deficient field its symptoms appear within two weeks of 
seedling emergence. A broad band of white or very light-yellow tissue, with reddish 
veins appears on each side of the midrib, beginning at the base of the second or third 
leaf from the top of the plant. The symptoms later extends in stripes towards the tip 
parallel to the midrib. The mild deficiency disappears by the mid-season, but the silking 
and taselling are delayed.

In zinc deficient soils, broadcast 10 kg of zinc sulphate heptahydrate (21%) or 6.5 
kg zinc sulphate monohydrate (33%)  per acre at sowing mixed with an equal quantity 
of dry soil. On the appearance of deficiency symptoms, apply above mentioned 
quantity of zinc sulphate along with equal quantity of soil along rows, hoe it into the 
soil and then irrigate the field. When symptoms are observed late in the season and 
interculture is not possible, spray zinc sulphate-lime mixture prepared by mixing 1200 g 
of zinc sulphate heptahydrate (21%) and 600 g of unslaked lime or 750 g zinc sulphate 
monohydrate (33%) and 375 g of unslaked lime in 200 litres of water to cover one acre.

Weed Control: Two hand hoeings preferably with improved wheel hand hoe at 
monthly intervals help to keep the weeds under check. Alternatively, spray 800 g per 

28



acre Atrataf 50 WP (atrazine) on medium to heavy textured soils and 500 g per acre 
in light soils in 200 litres of water or spray 250 g per acre Atrataf 50 WP (atrazine) as 
20 cm wide band over the crop rows upto 10 days after sowing followed by hoeing/
interculture at 15 to 30 days after sowing. This herbicide is effective on broadleaf 
weeds particularly itsit and grasses. 

Earthing up: The ridge-sown crop should be earthed up after the application of the 
second dose of fertilizer at knee height stage.

Irrigation: Uniformly spread 30 quintals per acre of paddy straw mulch at sowing 
for saving of precious irrigation water. Depending upon rains, apply first irrgation at 25-
30 days after sowing. The subsequent irrigations should be applied at 2 weeks interval 
upto10th April and thereafter at one week interval upto maturity. Take special care to 
apply irrigation to evade high temperature stress during grain filling period.

Surface Drip Irrigation and Fertigation: Application of fertilizers with irrigation 
water is known as fertigation. Fertigation saves 20% of fertilizers. For using this system 
broad beds are prepared at 1.20 m apart from centre to centre of furrow. These beds 
are 80 cm wide on the top and the furrows between the two beds are 40 cm wide. 
The beds are covered with U.V stabilized plastic film (Black) of 25 micron thickness 
(23 grams per m2). Two rows are planted at a spacing of 60 cm keeping plant to plant 
distance of 20 cm by dibbling. One lateral pipe is used to irrigate two rows of maize. 
The drippers are spaced 30 cm apart and are operated at a discharge of 2.2 litres per 
hour as per following table:

Month Timing of irrigation (Minutes)*
February 22

March 64
April 120
May 130

* If discharge rate is different, time of irrigation may be adjusted proportionally by the 
formula:
Adjusted time (min) = (2.2 × Time of irrigation (min)*) ÷ Discharge of dripper (litre/hour)

For the medium fertility soils application of 80 kg of urea, 32 kg of mono ammonium 
phosphate (MAP) and 16 kg of muriate of potash (white) per acre is reccomended. 
Start fertigation 12 days after sowing of maize and apply 25% of the fertilizers in four 
equal splits during first month on weekly basis. Rest of the fertilizer should be applied 
in equal splits on weekly basis upto first week of May. 

For sub-surface drip irrigation in spring maize, see chapter on ‘Multiple 
Cropping’ under Kharif maize-peas-spring maize cropping system.

Harvesting and Threshing: The crop is ready for harvesting even when stalks 
and leaves are somewhat green, but husks have dried. Shell ears when moisture 
content ranges between 15 and 20 per cent. Maize shellers operated manually or with 
power are available in the market.

29



Maize dehusker and conventional grain combines can also be used for threshing 
maize ears with husks to save labour involved in dehusking. The maize ears should 
preferably be dried 3-4 days after harvesting. However, some adjustments are 
necessary, details of which are given in chapter on ‘Agricultural Engineering’. 

Maize Drying: A portable maize dryer 3 ton capacity has been developed as per 
international norms and recommended to dry maize grains from a moisture level 25 
to 15% in 8-10 hours. This cross-flow dryer has three pass, indirect type diesel fired 
heating system. A control panel to regulate and display the temperature of heated air, 
exit air and speed of air blower with variable frequency drive is provided for better 
operation. The dryer can maintain air temperature 60-75oC with the grain temperature 
of 45oC for seed and 60oC for commercial purpose. The dryer is capable of drying 
maize grain @ 1.0 – 1.5 % per hour consuming about 4 liters/hr of diesel initially for 
1 hr. A provision of heat recovery from flue gases ensures higher fuel efficiency with 
reduced diesel consumption to about 2 litres/hr later on. The dryer can be operated 
both with tractor PTO or electricity. One each of skilled and unskilled labor is required 
to operate this dryer.

Seed Production of Hybrids: The seed of hybrids should be produced during 
kharif season only. 
Plant Protection Measures
(a) Insect Pests
1.	 Maize shoot fly: Maize shoot fly is the most serious insect pest of spring maize. 

It attacks very young (3-7 days old) seedlings, producing deformed, twisted and 
dead hearted plants. For its control, prefer seed treatment with Gaucho. If seed 
treatment is not done, then apply 5 kg Furadan 3 G (carbofuran) per acre in the 
furrows at the time of sowing. 

2.	 Jassid, thrips, pyrilla, grey weevil and leaf-feeding insects: These pests 
sometimes attack spring maize crop during March to May. Due to attack of sucking 
pests leaves turns pale.

3.	 Armyworm and silk cutter: The larvae feed on the tender leaves of the whorl 
or may eat out the whole leaf including the mid-rib. Presence of faecal pellets on 
the whorl leaves indicates the occurrence of this pest. Attack is relatively more on 
the border rows adjoining wheat field in March. Silk cutter larvae feed on silks and 
later on may damage the few grains in the developing cob. The low incidence of 
this insect is noticed on timely sown spring maize crop. If attack occurs, collect and 
destroy the larvae.

4.	 Fall armyworm (Spodoptera frugiperda): The young larvae feed by scrapping the 
leaf surface making papery windows. The bigger larvae feed voraciously on the 
central whorl leaves causing round to oblong holes and produce a large amount of 
faecal matter. The larva can be identified by predominant white-coloured inverted 
Y-shaped mark on the head and presence of four spots arranged in square pattern 
at the tail end. 

30



Adopt the following control measures:
•	 Sow the crop at recommended time only.
•	 Avoid staggered sowing of maize in adjacent fields to minimize spread of this pest.
•	 Spray the crop with Coragen 18.5 SC (chlorantraniliprole*) @ 0.4 mL/ litre or 

Delegate 11.7 SC (spinetoram*) @ 0.5 mL/ litre or Missile 5 SG (emamectin 
benzoate) @ 0.4g/ litre using 120 litres of water per acre, for crop up to 20 days 
old. Thereafter, the amount of water used per acre needs to be increased up to 200 
litres with corresponding increase in dosage of above insecticides. For effective 
control, direct the nozzle towards the whorl.

•	 If the infestation is in patches or the crop is more than 40 days old and spraying 
is difficult, apply soil-insecticide/biopesticide mixture (about half gram) in the 
whorls of the infested plants to manage fall armyworm. To prepare soil–insecticide 
mixture, add 5 mL of Coragen 18.5 SC (chlorantraniliprole*) or Delegate 11.7 SC 
(spinetoram*) or 5 g of Missile 5 SG (emamectin benzoate) or 25 g of Delfin WG 
(Bacillus thuringiensis subsp. kurstaki*) or 25 mL of Dipel 8 L(Bacillus thuringiensis 
subsp. kurstaki*) in 10 mL of water and mix well in one kg of soil.

•	 Precaution: Use gloves for preparation and application of the mixture.
(b) Diseases
1.	 Seed rot and seedling blight (Fusarium, Penicillium, Aspergillus spp.): Poor 

germination, unthrifty seedlings and seedling mortality are the symptoms. Use 
disease free seed.

2.	 Post-flowering stalk rots (Macrophomina phaseolina, Cephalosporium maydis, 
Fusarium spp.): All the stalk rots result in wilting of plants after flowering followed 
by weakening of stem.  Infection with M. phaseolina result in black sporulation in 
the pith region. Dry conditions at tasseling stage favour disease development. 
Water stress at the time of flowering favours the disease. Grow  recommended 
varieties.

Note: No incidence has been observed of most of the diseases prevalent during kharif 
season, namely maydis leaf blight, banded leaf and sheath blight, brown stripe downy 
mildew and pre-flowering stalk rots.
(c) Birds/Rodents 

See Chapter - Management of Rodents and Birds.

MINOR MILLETS
Minor (or small) millets are a group of small-seeded cereal crops that are well 

suited to marginal growing conditions, require fewer inputs and are recognized for 
their high nutritional value, making them important for sustainable agriculture. The 
prominent small millets include finger millet (Eleusine coracana), foxtail millet (Setaria 
italica), proso millet (Panicum miliaceum), barnyard millet (Echinochloa crusgalli), 
kodo millet (Paspalum scrobiculatum) and little millet (Panicum sumatrense).

31



Climatic and Soil Requirements: Minor millets requires hot climate and can be 
grown successfully on well-drained sandy loam to loam soils. Avoid waterlogged and 
salt affected fields, as they cannot tolerate water logging.

PROSO MILLET
Proso millet (cheena in Punjabi) is a summer season crop being introduced for 

cultivation in Punjab. It is a short-duration and low water requiring crop. It possesses 
good nutritional quality, being high in protein, dietary fibre, minerals and antioxidants.
Improved Varieties

Punjab Cheena 1 (2024): It is a short statured (85 cm) and short duration (66 
days) variety, yielding on an average of 3.2 quintal grains per acre. Seeds are shiny, 
light brown in color and possess good quantities of protein (12.28 mg/100 g), resistant 
starch (20.91 g/100 g), Calcium (40.95 mg/100 g) and Iron (4.02 mg/100 g) content. 
It has low predicted glycemic index (54.39), low glycemic load (32.51) and its value 
added products have very good organoleptic acceptability score.
Agronomic Practices

Land Preparation: Prepare the land after a pre-sowing irrigation (rauni) to ensure 
optimum soil moisture (wattar). Carry out 2-3 ploughings followed by planking to obtain 
a fine tilth.

Time of Sowing: Best sowing time for attaining higher grain yields is between 
10 March to 30 March under Punjab conditions. Delayed sowing beyond March 
significantly reduces grain yield.

Seed Rate and Method of Sowing: Use 3.0 to 4.0 kg seed per acre. Sow the crop 
by kera or pora method at a row-to-row spacing of 22.5 cm and depth of 2-3 cm. 

Fertilizer Application: Apply 24 kg nitrogen (52 kg urea) per acre in two equal 
splits, with half as a basal dose before sowing and the remaining half at 20 days after 
sowing or after first irrigation. 

Weed Control: Inter-row cultivation with a wheel hoe can be practiced to manage 
weeds and improve soil aeration.

Irrigation: Proso millet is a drought-tolerant crop but yields better if irrigated timely. 
Irrigate the crop depending on prevailing weather conditions. 

Harvesting: The crop should be harvested when the grains become hard and 
plants turn yellowish. Harvesting can be done by using sickles and the harvested crop 
should be stacked for 7-10 days before threshing. Threshing can be done manually.

FOXTAIL MILLET
Foxtail millet (Kangni in Punjabi) is also a short-duration summer season crop 

being recommended for cultivation in Punjab. It requires less water and possesses 
good nutritional quality. 
Improved Varieties

Punjab Kangni 1 (2025): It is a short duration variety that matures in 76 days. It 
attains an average height of 100.5 cm and its average grain yield is 5.1 quintals per 

32



acre. The grains have good nutritional properties in terms of protein (13.59 mg/l00 
g), resistant starch (24.39 g/100 g), Calcium (54.85 mg/100 g) and Iron (4.53 mg/100 
g) content. It also has low predicted glycaemic index (52.57) and low glycaemic load 
(31.68) and its value added products have very good organoleptic acceptability score.
Agronomic Practices

Land Preparation: Prepare the land after a pre-sowing irrigation (rauni) to ensure 
optimum soil moisture (wattar). Carry out 2-3 ploughings followed by planking to obtain 
a fine tilth.

Time of Sowing: Sow the crop from 25 March to 20 April for obtaining the higher 
grain yields under Punjab conditions. Delayed sowing beyond April significantly 
reduces grain yield.

Seed Rate and Method of Sowing: Use 4.0 to 5.0 kg seed per acre. Sow the crop 
by kera or pora method at a row-to-row spacing of 30.0 cm and depth of 2-3 cm. 

Weed Control: Inter-row cultivation with a wheel hoe can be practiced to manage 
weeds and improve soil aeration.

Irrigation: Foxtail millet requires 5-6 irrigations for ensuring better yields. The first 
and second irrigation should be applied at 15 days interval after sowing and thereafter 
the crop requires 3 more irrigations at 10 days interval. Irrigations should be applied 
according to the prevailing weather conditions. 

Harvesting: The crop should be harvested once the grains become hard and the 
plants turn yellowish. Harvesting can be done by using sickles and the harvested crop 
should be stacked for 7-10 days before threshing. Threshing can be done manually.

33



2. PULSE CROPS

GRAM
Gram is an important rabi pulse crop of Punjab. In 2023-24, it was grown on 1.4 

thousand hectares with production of 2.2 thousand tonnes. The average yield was 
15.61 quintals per hectare (6.32 quintals per acre).

Climatic Requirements: Gram is a winter season crop but severe cold and frost 
are injurious to it. It is primarily a crop of low-rainfall areas, but gives good returns 
in irrigated conditions as well. Excessive rains soon after sowing or at flowering and 
fruiting or hail-storms at ripening cause heavy loss. Sometimes there is an early onset 
of summer which reduces the growing   period of this crop, hastens maturity and 
reduces the yield.

Soil Type: Gram grows best on well-drained, light to medium textured soils. Saline, 
alkaline or waterlogged soils are not suitable for its cultivation.

Rotations: Gram in rotation with cereal crops helps in controlling soil-borne 
diseases. The common rotations are: Chari/Bajra-Gram, Rice/Maize-Gram and Rice-
Gram-Summer Moong.
Improved Varieties
Desi gram (Irrigated)

PBG 10 (2023): The plants are tall with semi-erect growth habit. It has bold seeds 
with brownish colour and 100-seed weight is 25.9 g. This variety is moderately resistant 
to Ascochyta Blight and Botrytis grey mould. It matures in about 153 days. Its average 
yield is 8.6 quintals per acre. 

PBG 8 (2020): The plants are tall with semi-erect growth habit. It has medium bold 
seeds with brownish colour and 100-seed weight is 16.5 g. This variety is moderately 
resistant to Botrytis grey mould. It matures in about 158 days. Its average yield is 8.4 
quintals per acre. 

PBG 7 (2014): The plants are tall, semi-erect. It has medium bold seeds with 
brownish colour and 100-seed weight of 16 g. This variety is moderately resistant to 
Ascochyta blight (Chaanani) and fairly resistant to wilt and dry root rot. It matures in 
about 159 days. Its average yield is 8 quintals per acre.

PBG 5 (2003): It has thick stem with dark green foliage. It matures in about 165 
days. Its seeds are medium bold (18 g/100 seeds weight) with dark brown appearance. 
This variety is fairly resistant to Ascochyta blight (Chaanani) and wilt complex (wilt, root 
rot and foot rot). Its average yield is 6.8 quintals per acre.

GPF 2 (1994): The plants are semi-erect with lush green leaves and long fruiting 
branches with two seeds per pod. It has bold seeds and matures in about 170 days. Its 
average yield is 7.6 quintals per acre.

34



Desi gram (Rainfed)
PDG 4 (2000): Its plants are erect with dark green foliage. It bears long fruiting 

branches arising from the base. It has bold seeds and matures in about 160 days. It 
is fairly resistant to wilt, foot rot, root rot and Ascochyta blight. Its average yield is 7.8 
quintals per acre.
Kabuli gram

L 552 (2011): It is early in flowering and matures in 157 days. It is tall and erect 
variety. It has large pods and bold seeds (33.6 g/100 seeds weight). The seeds are 
creamy white in appearance with good culinary properties. Its average yield is 7.3 
quintals per acre.
Varieties Recommended for Various Areas/Conditions
Varieties Areas/Conditions for which recommended

PBG 10, PBG 7 Irrigated conditions throughout Punjab state.

PBG 5 Irrigated conditions in humid areas comprising the districts of   Gurdaspur, 
Hoshiarpur, Ropar, Shaheed Bhagat Singh Nagar, Tarn Taran and Amritsar.

PBG 8, GPF 2 and Irrigated conditions in the entire state except humid areas.
L 552
PDG 4 Rainfed conditions in the entire state except humid areas.

Agronomic Practices
•	 PBG 10 is moderately 

Preparatory Tillage: Gram does not resistant to Ascochyta Blight 
require fine tilth. The soil should be opened up and Botrytis grey mould.
well, as loose and well-aerated soil restricts the •	 PBG 8 is moderately resistant 
wilt attack and increases the grain yield. Deep to Botrytis grey mould and 
tillage upto 22.5 cm depth has been found to PBG 7 to Ascochyta blight 
increase the yield. It also helps the plants to (Chanani). 
develop deep roots. •	 Follow raised bed sowing 

Time of Sowing: The optimum sowing after rice, particularly on 
time for desi gram under rainfed conditions is heavy soil. 
from 10 October to 25 October. Under irrigated •	 Inoculate the seed with 
conditions both desi and kabuli gram should recommended biofertilizer 
be sown from 25 October to 10 November. before sowing. 
The early-sown crop suffers from wilt owing to •	 For obtaining higher yield, 
high temperature at that time. It also attains spray 2% urea at 90 and 110 
excessive vegetative growth which results in days of sowing. 
poor seed-set. On the other hand, the late- •	 Sow the crop during October 
sown crop makes poor vegetative growth, with 25 to November 10 and follow 
inadequate root development which results in crop rotation with cereals 
low yield. This can be partly compensated by to prevent stem rot/ foot rot/ 
increasing the seed rate. other soil borne diseases.

35



Seed Rate: The optimum seed rate is 30 kg per acre for variety PBG 10, 24 kg per 
acre for PBG 5 and 15-18 kg per acre for other varieties of desi gram. For kabuli gram 
use 37 kg seed per acre. Seed rate of desi gram should be increased to 27 kg per acre 
for all varieties except PBG 10 and PBG 5 in the case of second fortnight of November 
sowing and to 36 kg per acre in case sowing is done in the first fortnight of December.

Seed Inoculation: Moisten the seed recommended for one acre with minimum 
amount of water. Mix thoroughly one packet each of Mesorhizobium (LGR-33) and 
Rhizobacterium (RB-1) biofertilizers with it and dry the inoculated seed in shade. Sow 
the seed within one hour after inoculation. These bio-fertilizers are available with the 
Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana Seed Shop at Gate No. 1 and Krishi Vigyan 
Kendra/Farm Advisory Service Centres in different districts. 

Method of Sowing: Gram should be sown by the pora method in rows 30 cm 
apart. The seed should be placed 10-12.5 cm deep, because the shallow-sown crop is 
more liable to be damaged by wilt. Conventional seed-cum-fertilizer drill with broader 
flutes can be used for sowing gram (see Appendix III). 

For reducing the incidence of gram caterpillar (Helicoverpa armigera), sow two 
rows of linseed (30 cm apart) as intercrop after every 20 rows of gram.

Raised Bed Sowing: Sowing of gram on medium to heavy textured soils particularly 
after rice should be done on beds spaced 67.5 cm apart (37.5 cm bed top and 30 cm 
furrow) by using wheat bed planter. Sow two rows per bed with row spacing of 20 cm 
using the same quantity of seed, fertilizers and following other cultivation practices 
as in flat sowing of gram. Raised bed sowing saves the crop from adverse effect of 
irrigation on heavy textured soils.
Fertilizer Application

Recommended Nutrients* (kg/acre) Fertilizers (kg/acre) Time and method of 
areas/situation application

N P2O5 Urea Single super-
phosphate

Desi gram
Irrigated and 6 8 13 50 Drill all fertilizers at 
unirrigated sowing

Kabuli gram
Irrigated 6 16 13 100 -do-

* These nutrients can also be supplied from other fertilizers available in the market. (Appendix IV).
For obtaining higher yield, in addition to the recommended dose of fertilizers, spray 

2% urea (3 kg in 150 litres of water per acre) at 90 and 110 days of sowing.
Enriching zinc content in gram grain: The zinc content in grain (for nutritional 

quality improvement) can be increased by tank mix foliar spray of 0.5% zinc sulphate 
heptahydrate (21% Zn) (750 g per acre) + 2% urea (3 kg per acre) using 150 litres of 
water at 90 and 110 days of sowing. This spray results in higher yield also.

Weed Control: One or two hand-hoeings preferably with improved wheel hand 
hoe at 30 and 60 days after sowing help to keep the weeds under check.

36



Irrigation: Where irrigation facilities are available, give a heavy pre-sowing irrigation 
(rauni). It will ensure deep rooting for proper utilization of soil moisture. Afterwards, 
give one more irrigation between mid-December and end-January depending upon the 
date of sowing and the rainfall. This irrigation reduces the incidence of wilt disease. In 
no case, should this irrigation be given earlier than 4 weeks after sowing. If early rains 
are received, delay the irrigation. Excess of irrigation enhances vegetative growth 
and depresses grain yield. Do not irrigate the crop if it is sown after rice particularly 
on heavy soils. Irrigation applied on such soils causes heavy damage to the crop. 
Irrigation can be applied to gram sown after rice on raised beds under water stress 
conditions especially at pod initiation stage.

Harvesting: Harvest when the pods mature and the plants dry up. Harvest with a 
sickle. Do not uproot the plants and deprive the soil of the root residues.
Plant Protection
(a) Insect Pests 

1. Termite: Termites attack the crop especially at seedling stage and also near 
maturity. The pest can generally be observed feeding on roots or near the root zone 
of the damaged plants. The affected plants dry up and can be pulled out easily. The 
incidence of pest is more in light soils.

2. Gram caterpillar (Helicoverpa armigera): The larvae damage the gram crop by 
feeding on leaves, flower buds, flower pods and grains in the pods. 

Bio-intensive IPM (BIPM) module for the management of gram caterpillar:
•	 Grow PAU recommended tolerant varieties of chickpea.
•	 Sow two rows of linseed (30 cm apart) as intercrop after every 20 rows of gram.
•	 Install Pheromone traps @ 2 traps per acre for monitoring the moth activity.
•	 Spray of homemade neem extract @ 1750 mL/acre in 80-100 litres of water at 

flowering stage.
•	 Spray the crop with following biopesticides at ETL level of 16 or more larvae, 

observed from a minimum of 10 randomly selected spots (100 plants) on per meter 
row length basis. 
	 800 g Bacillus thuringiensis var. kurstaki* 0.5 WP (DOR Bt-1) or 200 	 mL 	 	

	 Helicop 2% AS (HaNPV)* in 80-100 litres of water per acre and repeat after 	 	
	 10 days, if necessary

i.	 Cultural Control: Sow two rows of linseed •	 To manage gram caterpillar, 
(30 cm apart) as intercrop after every 20 rows of adopt the Bio-intensive 
gram for reducing the incidence of gram caterpillar. IPM (BIPM) module.

ii.	 Chemical Control: Monitor the gram crop •	 Observe a waiting period 
at pod initiation stage to record larval population of 3 days after spray of 

Coragen 18.5 SC before 
of gram caterpillar on per meter row length basis. consuming leaves and 
Record the observations by gently shaking the green grains.
plants from a minimum of 10 randomly selected 
spots per acre. If a total of 16 or more larvae are 
observed from 10 spots (100 plants), spray 800 g Bacillus thuringiensis var. kurstaki* 

37



0.5 WP (DOR Bt-1) or 200 mL Helicop 2% AS (HaNPV)* or 50 mL Coragen 18.5 SC 
(chlorantraniliprole*) or 80 g Proclaim 5 SG (emamectin benzoate) or 160 mL Rimon 
(novaluron*) in 80-100 litres of water per acre and repeat after two weeks, if necessary. 
Prefer to use biopesticides as first spray for younger larvae and repeat the spray 
after a week if necessary.

Precaution: Before consuming leaves and green grains, ensure a waiting period of 3 days after 
the spray of Coragen 18.5 SC (chlorantraniliprole*).

3. Stored Grain Insect Pests: (See Appendix V)
(b) Diseases 

1. Ascochyta blight/Chanani (Ascochyta rabiei): Dark-brown spots studded with 
black dot-like bodies are produced on the stem, branches, leaflets and pods. The 
lesions are elongated on stems, branches and twigs whereas; lesions are round to 
oval on pods and leaves. Black dot-like bodies concentrically arranged in the spots 
is the main symptom of disease. Shoot terminals are more liable to attack. Even the 
seeds in the pods are infected. In the event of excessive rains, whole crop may be 
blighted and killed rapidly. A temperature of 20oC, relative humidity above 85% and 
cloudy weather with intermittent rains is highly conducive for development of disease. 
Grow comparatively resistant varieties PBG 10, PBG 7 and PBG 5. After harvest, the 
diseased plants should not be allowed to stand in the field and should be destroyed. 
Use disease free seed.

2. Grey mould (Botrytis cinerea): Small water-soaked spots are produced on 
leaflets. Spots on infected leaves become dark brown. Under high humid conditions, 
white mycelial strands and erect sporophores of the fungus are produced on flowers, 
leaves, growing tips, branches and pods. At the point of infection, soft rotting of the 
tissue occurs. Flowers and growing tips are more vulnerable. The fungus forms dark 
grey to black sporodochia on infected tissue. The most suitable weather conditions 
for development of disease are temperature around 25oC, high relative humidity and 
rain during flowering. To manage this disease, sow disease free seed and grow variety 
PBG 10 and PBG 8. Destroy infected plant debris after harvest.

3. Wilt (Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. ciceri): Affected plants show drooping of 
petioles and dull green colour in the initial stage. Slowly, all the leaves turn yellow 
and later become straw coloured. The most characteristic symptom of this disease is 
vascular dis-colouration of roots which is dark brown to black. Sometimes, only one 
sided branches are affected resulting in partial wilting. The soil temperature of 24-27oC 
favours disease development. Grow fairly wilt tolerant desi varieties PBG 10, PBG 
8, PBG 7, GPF 2, PDG 4, PBG 5 and kabuli variety L 552. Conserve soil moisture in 
rainfed areas. Plough the field with a furrow-turning plough to eradicate weeds and 
promote water infilteration. Early sowing of the crop should be avoided. 

4. Stem rot (Sclerotinia sclerotium): The disease attacks all the above ground 
parts of the plant. The main stem is usually affected at the soil level. The affected parts 
are shredded and covered with white mycelium embedded with black sclerotia. The 
whitish, fluffy fungal growth can also be seen on the debris at soil surface. The disease 
is predominant in cool and moist conditions. The seed should be free from sclerotia. 

38



Sow the gram crop from 25 October to 10 November to escape the disease attack. 
Collect and destroy the diseased debris soon after harvesting the crop. In the month 
of May or June, flood the field after deep ploughing and do not leave it fallow. Rotate 
gram with non-susceptible crops such as wheat and barley.

5. Foot rot: (Opercullela padwickii): Light brown to dark-brown lesions appear 
on the collar region of the plants. Later, these lesions become black and affect the 
basal tap root. Complete girdling in the collar region takes place. Sow the crop from 
25 October to 10 November. Follow crop rotation with non-susceptible crops such as 
wheat and barley.

LENTIL
Lentil occupied an area of 0.4 thousand hectares with production of 0.2 thousand 

tonnes during the year 2023-24. The average yield was 4.78 quintals per hectare (1.93 
quintals per acre).

Climate: It is hardy crop and can tolerate frost and severe winter. It can be grown 
with the moisture conserved in the soil during the rainy season.

Soil Type: All soils, except those which are saline, alkaline or waterlogged are 
suitable for raising this crop.

Rotations: Rice-Lentil-Summer Moong, Desi Cotton-Lentil and Groundnut-Lentil
Improved Varieties

LL 1373 (2020): Its plants are short, erect with profuse branching and bear more 
number of pods. It has light green leaves, pink flowers, non-pigmented light green pods 
and rudimentary tendrils. It matures in 140 days and it is resistant to rust. Its seeds are 
bold and 100-seed weight is 3.5 g. It has good culinary properties. Its average yield is 
5.1 quintals per acre. 

LL 931 (2009): Its plants are short, erect with profuse branching and bear more 
number  of  pods. It  has  dark green leaves, pink flowers, non-pigmented green pods 
and rudimentary tendrils. It matures in 146 days and is fairly resistant to rust. Its seeds 
are medium bold with greyish brown colour and light flecks. It   has   good culinary 
properties. Its average yield is 4.8 quintals per acre.
Agronomic Practices •	 LL 1373 is resistant to rust.

Preparatory Tillage: The land should be •	 Sow crop in second 
ploughed two or three times to pulverise it well. fortnight of October in sub-
Each ploughing should be followed by planking. montane areas and from 
The field should be free from weeds and clods at end of October to first week 
the time of sowing. of November in other areas.

Time of Sowing: The crop may be sown in the •	 The optimum seed rate is 
second fortnight of October in the sub-montane 18 kg per acre for LL 1373 
areas and from end of October to first week of and  12-15 kg per acre for LL 
November in other areas. 931.	

Seed Rate: The optimum seed rate is 18 kg •	 Inoculate the seed with 
per acre for LL 1373 and 12-15 kg per acre for LL recommended biofertilizer 
931. before sowing.

39



Seed Inoculation: Moisten the seed recommended for one acre with minimum 
amount of water. Mix thoroughly one packet each of Rhizobium (LLR-12) and 
Rhizobacterium (RB-2) with it. Allow it to dry in shade. Sow the seed within one hour 
after inoculation. Application of consortium culture enhances the grain yield. Rhizobium 
and Rhizobacterium  can  be  applied simultaneously with fungicide. These bio-fertilizers 
are available  with  the  Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana Seed Shop at Gate 
No. 1 and Krishi Vigyan Kendra/Farm Advisory Service Centres in different districts.

Method of Sowing: The crop should be sown in rows 22.5 cm apart by seed cum 
fertilizer  drill  or pora  method. Under late-sown conditions, the row-spacing  should 
be reduced to 20 cm. It  can  also  be  sown by broadcasting the seed  following  the  
paddy  crop  where  the  shortage  of time as well as field conditions do not permit good 
land preparation. 

Raised Bed Sowing: Lentil can be successfully grown on raised beds. Sowing of 
lentil on medium to heavy textured soils should be done on beds spaced 67.5 cm apart 
(37.5 cm bed top and 30 cm furrow) by using wheat bed planter. Sow two rows per bed 
with row spacing of 20 cm using the same quantity of seed, fertilizers and following 
other cultivation practices as in flat bed sown lentil. Raised bed sowing saves the crop 
from adverse effect of irrigation/heavy rainfall on heavy textured soils.

Fertilizer Application: Inoculate the seed with Rhizobium and apply 5 kg N (11 
kg of urea) per acre and drill 8 kg P2O5 (50 kg superphosphate) per acre. Apply 16 kg 
P2O5 (100 kg superphosphate) per acre when seeds are not inoculated. Apply both the 
fertilizers at the time of sowing.

Weed Control: One or two weedings preferably with improved wheel hand hoe 30 
and 60 days after sowing are enough.

Irrigation: Lentil requires one or two irrigations depending upon the rains during 
the growing season. In case of one irrigation, apply it at 6 weeks after sowing and in 
case of two irrigations, apply one at 4 weeks after sowing and second at flowering or 
pod formation stage depending upon the prevailing weather conditions.

Harvesting: The crop should be harvested when the plants dry up and pods 
mature.
Plant Protection
a. Insect Pests

The lentil pod borer causes damage to the crop by feeding on leaves, flower buds, 
flowers, pods and grains in the pods. 

Stored Grain Insect Pests: (See Appendix V)
b. Diseases 

1. Blight (Ascochyta fabae f. sp. lentis): Dark brown spots are produced on stem, 
branches, leaves and pods. The lesions on the stems and branches are elongated. 
The characteristic symptoms of the disease are black pinhead-like pycnidial bodies of 
the fungus arranged on the spots in the form of concentric rings. On tender branches, 
spots rapidly girdle the branch and parts of the plant above the girdle, wilt and dry. The 
cool and humid conditions favour disease development and spread. Use disease free 

40



seed. Destroy the diseased plant debris after harvest to reduce the inoculum of the 
fungus. 

2. Rust (Uromyces viciae fabae): Yellowish white pycnial and aecial pustules 
develop on stems, branches, leaves and pods. These may appear singly or in small 
groups. Later on brown uredia are formed. Small pustules may coalesce to form 
large pustules. In later stage of the crop, dark brown to black telia are formed. In 
severe cases, affected plants dry up and give burnt appearance. Cloudy weather with 
intermittent rains and temperature around 20-22oC favours the disease development. 
Use clean seed free from diseased plant debris. Grow resistant variety LL 1373.

FIELD PEA
Field pea can successfully be grown in the Punjab state.
Climatic and Soil Requirements: The crop requires cool climate during its 

vegetative phase. However, severe cold and frost may adversely affect flowering and 
fruiting. Field pea can be grown on well drained sandy loam to clay loam soils.

Rotations: Maize-Field pea, Maize/Rice/Fodder/other Kharif crop-Field pea-
Summer Moong/Summer Mash/Summer Fodders, Summer Vegetables/Sugarcane/
Cotton-Field pea.
Improved Varieties

IPFD 12-2 (2023): It is a medium duration variety. It matures in about 124 days.  It 
has long pods with medium size grains.  The weight of 100 grains is 15.6g.  It is very 
attractive tendril type variety with plant height of 80 cm.  It has very good nutritional 
and cooking quality. Its grains contain 24.5 per cent protein.  It gives an average grain 
yield of 6.8 quintals per acre.
Agronomic Practices

Preparatory Tillage: Give two or three ploughings followed by plankings to obtain 
a fine seed bed.

Seed Rate: Use 20-25 kg seed per acre.
Time of Sowing: The optimum sowing time for field pea is from end-October to 

mid-November, however, its sowing can be extended upto end of November with slight 
reduction in yield.

Method of Sowing: The crop should be sown in rows at a row spacing of 30 cm 
by pora or kera or by using seed-cum fertilizer drill. 

Seed Inoculation: The inoculation of field pea seed with Rhizobium culture 
ensures proper nodulation and increases grain yield. Moisten the seed recommended 
for one acre with minimum amount of water. Mix throughly one packet of Rhizobium 
culture with it and let it dry in shade. Sow the seed immediately.  The Rhizobium culture 
can be obtained from Department of Microbiology, Punjab Agricultural University. 

41



Fertilizer Application: Apply 12 kg nitrogen (26 kg Urea) and 16 kg P2O5 (100 kg 
single superphosphate) per acre at the time of sowing by drilling along the rows.

Weed Control: The crop should be kept free from weeds by giving two hoeings 
preferably with wheel hand hoe at 3 and 6 weeks after sowing.

Irrigation: The crop should be sown after pre-sowing irrigation (rauni). However, it 
can be sown without irrigation after paddy if sufficient moisture is available. It requires 
two more irrigations, first during pre-flowering around end of December and second at 
pod-formation stage. In certain areas the crop may need only one irrigation, depending 
upon the timing of rainfall during crop season. The crop can be grown rainfed in sub-
montane areas.

Harvesting: The crop is ready for harvesting in the 3rd week of March.
Plant Protection
(a) Insect Pests

1.	 Pea stem fly: It causes serious damage in the early sown crop at the seedling 
stage. Avoid sowing of the crop earlier than mid-October to check its attack.

2.	 Pea thrips: It causes severe damage to the young crop by sucking cell sap. 
3.	 Pea leaf miner: The larvae feed by making tunnels in the leaves and cause 

serious damage during December-March. Affected leaves develop white zig-zag 
galleries.

4.	 Pea aphid: It sucks cell sap resulting in yellowing and drying of leaves.
5.	 Pod borers: The larvae damage the crop by feeding on flowers and pods.
6. Stored Grain Insect Pests: (See Appendix V) 

(b) Diseases
1.	 Powdery mildew: White floury patches, covering large areas appear on stems, 

branches, leaves and pods. 
2.	 Wilt: Rotting of roots and yellowing of the lower most leaves is followed by 

wilting. Avoid sowing earlier than the recommended date in badly infested areas.
3.	 Rust: Yellowish, reddish-brown spherical raised pustules appear on leaves, 

stems, branches and pods from December onwards. Keep the field free from Rewari 
weed which serves as a source of inoculum. 

SUMMER MOONG
Summer Moong is a popular short duration pulse crop. Due to its short duration, 

it can fit well in many cropping systems. It has a great scope in rice-wheat cropping 
system.

Climatic Requirements: Moong is considered to be the hardiest of all pulse crops. 
It requires a hot climate. Moong is also suitable as a kharif crop.

42



Soil Type: A well drained loamy to sandy-loam soil is suitable. Saline-alkaline or 
waterlogged soils are unsuitable for raising this crop.

Rotations: Sugarcane/Potato/Cotton/Raya-Summer Moong, Summer Moong-
Maize/Rice-Raya/Wheat, Summer Moong-Maize-Potato, Summer Moong-Rice-
Potato, Summer Moong-Kharif Moong-Raya/Wheat, Summer Moong-Rice/Maize-
Gobhi Sarson, Summer Moong-Soybean-Peas, Fodder-Wheat, Summer moong-DSR/
DSBR-Wheat.
Improved Varieties

SML 1827 (2019): It has erect plant type with medium stature. It bears pods in 
clusters and has synchronous maturity (about 62 days). Each pod contains about 10 
seeds. It is resistant to yellow mosaic disease. Grains are shining green and medium 
sized with good culinary properties. Its average yield is 5.0 quintals per acre.

SML 832 (2010): It has erect plant type with medium stature. It bears pods in clusters 
and possesses early and synchronous maturity (about 61 days). Pods are of blackish 
brown colour at maturity. Each pod contains about 10 grains. Grains are shining green 
and medium sized with good culinary properties. Its average yield is 4.6 quintals per acre.

SML 668 (2002): It has erect plant type with short stature. It bears pods in clusters 
and possesses early and synchronous maturity (about 60 days). Pods are long with 
thick coat and each pod contains 10-11 seeds. Grains are bold with good cooking 
quality. Its average yield is 4.5 quintals per acre.
Agronomic Practices

Land Preparation: Give two or three 
ploughings to the land followed by planking to •	 Use 15 kg seed for SML 668 
crush the clods and eradicate the weeds. Summer and 12 kg seed per acre for 
moong can be sown without any preparatory other varieties.
tillage after the harvest of wheat. The sowing •	 Sow the crop from 20 March 
can be done with zero-till drill if there is no wheat to 10 April.
straw in the field. In case of combine harvested •	 Inoculate the seed with 
wheat crop, summer moong can be sown with recommended consortium 
PAU Happy Seeder/Smart Seeder/Super seeder biofertilizer before sowing.
in the presence of wheat straw under optimum •	 In the presence of wheat 
moisture. Under dry condition, it can be directly straw, sow the crop using 
sown with Happy seeder/Smart seeder followed PAU happy seeder.
by immediate irrigation. •	 Prefer sowing summer 

Seed Rate: Use 15 kg seed for SML 668 and moong on raised beds in 
12 kg seed per acre for other varieties. case of medium to heavy 

Seed Inoculation: Inoculate the seed textured soils.
with single packet of consortium biofertilizer •	 Fertilizer is not needed in 
(Rhizobium sp. LSMR-1 and Rhizobacterium RB- summer moong sown after 
3) at the time of sowing. Moisten the seed using potato.
one packet per acre with about 300 mL of water. •	 For synchronus maturity, 
Mix the seed thoroughly with culture and let it dry stop last irrigation at about 
in the shade. Sow the seed within one hour of 55 days after sowing.

43



application of biofertilizer. Inoculation of seed with consortium biofertilizer enhances 
grain yield. This bio-fertilizer is available with the Punjab Agricultural University Seed 
Shop, Gate No. 1 Ludhiana and Krishi Vigyan Kendra/Farm Advisory Service Centres 
in different districts.

Time and Method of Sowing: Sow the crop from 20 March to 10 April. Its sowing 
can be done up to 3rd week of April. However, there is a risk of pre-monsoon showers 
at maturity. Sow the crop in rows 17.5 to 22.5 cm apart. The seed should be placed 4 
to 6 cm deep with seed drill/kera/pora/zero-till drill/happy seeder.

Raised Bed Sowing: Sowing of summer moong in medium to heavy textured 
soils should be done on beds spaced 67.5 cm apart (37.5 cm bed top, 30 cm furrow) 
by using wheat bed planter. Sow two rows per bed with row spacing of 20 cm using 
the same quantity of seed, fertilizers and following other cultivation practices as in flat 
sown summer moong. Irrigation is applied in furrows by taking care that beds are not 
over flooded. This practice not only saves the crop from damage by rain especially at 
emergence but also saves about 20-30 per cent irrigation water along with 10 per cent 
increase in yield over flat sowing.

Fertilizer Application: Drill 5 kg of N (11 kg urea) along with 16 kg P2O5 (100 kg of single 
superphosphate) per acre at the time of sowing to summer moong to be sown after wheat. 

Note: Summer moong sown after potato in rice-potato-summer moong and maize-potato-
summer moong needs no fertilizer.

Weed Control: One or two hoeings are recommended to keep weeds under check. 
Give the first hoeing four weeks after sowing of the crop and second hoeing, if needed, 
about two weeks thereafter. Alternatively, spray 300 mL per acre imazethapyr 10 SL at 
20-25 days of sowing for controlling grassy, broadleaf weeds and sedges. Dissolve the 
recommended quantity of herbicide in 150 litres of water per acre and spray uniformly.

Irrigation: Apply 3 to 5 irrigations to the crop depending upon the weather 
conditions and water holding capacity of the soil. Apply first irrigation 25 days after 
sowing. The last irrigation should be stopped about 55 days after sowing for obtaining 
high yields and synchronous maturity. For sub surface drip irrigation in summer moong, 
see chapter on Multiple Cropping.

Harvesting and Threshing: Harvest the crop when about 80% of the pods mature. 
Spike tooth type power thresher for wheat can be used to thresh moong after proper 
modifications. 
Plant-Protection Measures
(a) Insect Pests

1. Thrips: Summer moong crop is severely attacked by the thrips which is very 
small, dark brown insect, found in flowers and cause flower-drop, deformation of pods, 
deterioration of grain quality and ultimately high reduction in yield. Sometimes, there 
may be complete failure of the crop. For its management, install blue sticky traps @ 30 
per acre at flower initiation stage to manage the pest. Replace the traps after 10 days, 
if necessary or spray the crop at flower initiation stage using homemade neem extract 
@ 1750 mL per acre using 80-100 litres of water per acre with manually operated 
knapsack sprayer. 

44



To prepare neem extract, boil 5.0 kg mixture of neem leaves and fruits in 10 litres 
of water for 30 minutes. Then, filter this material through muslin cloth and use the 
filterate for spraying at the recommended dose.

2. Pod borer (Helicoverpa armigera): Larvae of the borer feed on leaves, flowers, 
pods and seeds in pods, thus, causing heavy loss in yield. The larvae may be pale 
green, yellow, brown or black in colour measuring about 3-5 cm when full grown. Larval 
presence can be observed from damage to plant and from dark green faeces below 
the plants on the soil. 

3. Tobacco caterpillar (Spodoptera litura): It is a polyphagous pest. The small 
larvae are black whereas grown up larvae are dark green with black triangular spots 
on body. Its moth lays eggs in masses covered with brown hairs on the lower side of 
leaves. After hatching, first and second instar larvae feed gregariously and sketetonize 
the foliage. Later on, the grown up larvae disperse and feed singly. Besides leaves, they 
also damage buds, flowers and pods. It can be managed by the following measures:
•	 Cultural Control: Ensure timely sowing of the crop. Control the weeds, particularly 

itsit/chapatti as it acts as an alternate host for the tobacco caterpillar. 
•	 Mechanical Control: Egg masses and young larvae of tobacco caterpillar feeding 

gregariously should be collected along with leaves and destroyed. 
(b) Diseases 

1. Yellow mosaic disease: It is a viral disease transmitted by whitefly. The leaves 
of the diseased plants develop irregular yellow and green patches. Infected plants 
bear no or only a few pale pods. Incidence of this disease is very less in timely sown 
crop. The disease can be controlled by the following measures:
yy Rogue out the affected plants early in the season. 
yy To manage this disease, grow yellow mosaic virus tolerant varieties SML 1827, 

Mash 1137 and Mash 1008. 
2. Root rot: Root rot caused by Macrophomina phaseolina produces dark lesions 

on leaves, branches, stems and roots. The tissues of the affected portion become 
weak and shred easily. Pycnidia can be seen on the affected portion. 

3. Rhizoctonia blight: It is caused by Rhizoctonia solani. It starts from leaf laminae 
or petioles or the young branches. Eventually, the top of plants become blighted and 
patches of such plants are conspicuously seen in the field. Whitish web like growth 
develops on leaves in humid weather. Dark brown sclerotia develop on infected tissue. 
Infestation on crop comes from the weeds in the field. Keeping the field weed free 
helps to check the disease.

SUMMER MASH
Climatic and Soil Requirements: Short duration summer mash varieties (70 to 

75 days) can be grown in the central and sub-montaneous tracts in summer (March to 
June). Mash can do well on all soils ranging from sandy loam to heavy clay except the 
saline-alkline or waterlogged soils. Its cultivation improves soil fertility.

45



Rotations: Summer mash can be grown after sugarcane/toria/raya/potato under 
irrigated conditions.
Improved Varieties

Mash 1137 (2019): This variety is recommended for sub-montaneous zone of 
Punjab state. It has erect and compact plant type with short stature (30 cm). It matures 
in about 74 days. Pod bearing is profuse and each 
pod contains 6-7 seeds. It is resistant to yellow mosaic •	 Sow mash from 15 March 
disease. Average grain yield is about 4.5 quintals per to first week of April.
acre. Grains are medium bold, blackish in colour and •	 Use 20 kg seed per acre.
possess good culinary properties. •	 Inoculate the seed 

Mash 1008 (2004): It has erect and compact plant with recommended 
type. It is a short statured (25 cm) variety. It  matures   Rhizobium before 
in  about 72 days. Pod bearing is profuse and each sowing.
pod contains 6-7 seeds. It is fairly tolerant to yellow 
mosaic virus and leaf crinkle virus. Average grain yield 
is about 4.2 quintals per acre. Grains are medium bold, blackish in colour, contain 
about 24 per cent protein and possess good culinary properties.
Agronomic Practices

Land Preparation: One or two ploughings followed by planking are enough. At 
sowing, field should be free from weeds.

Seed Rate: Use 20 kg seed per acre. Use bold seeds retained over the sieve with 
a mesh size of 3.6 mm for higher yields.

Seed Inoculation: Inoculate the seed with the recommended Rhizobium culture 
(LUR 6) before sowing. Wet the seed recommended for one acre with minimum 
amount of water. Mix thoroughly one packet of Rhizobium culture with seed on a clean 
pucca floor and let it dry in shade. Sow the seed immediately. Inoculation of seed 
with Rhizobium biofertilizer enhances grain yield. The biofertilizer is available with the 
Punjab Agricultural University Seed Shop at Gate No. 1 Ludhiana and Krishi Vigyan 
Kendra/Farm Advisory Service Centre in different districts.

Time and Method of Sowing: Sow from 15 March to 1st week of April at a row 
spacing of 22.5 cm. The plant-to-plant distance should be about 4-5 cm and sow 4 to 
6 cm deep with seed drill/kera/pora.

Fertilizer Application: Drill 5 kg N (11 kg of urea) along with 10 kg of P2O5 (60 kg 
of single superphosphate) per acre at sowing.

Weed Control: Hoe the crop one month after sowing. Later, the crop covers the 
ground well and does not allow the weeds to come up. Alternatively, spray 300 mL per 
acre imazethapyr 10 SL at 15-20 days after sowing for controlling grassy, broadleaf 
weeds and sedges. Dissolve the recommended quantity of herbicide in 150 litres of 
water per acre and spray uniformly.

Irrigation: The  crop  requires 3 to 4 irrigations. The last  irrigation  should be applied 
at about 60 days after sowing for obtaining high yields and synchronous maturity.

Harvesting: The crop should be harvested when 80% pods mature. The crop 
should not be uprooted.

Plant Protection Measures: See under summer moong.
46



3. OILSEED CROPS
RAPESEED AND MUSTARD

In trade, toria, gobhi sarson  and taramira are categorised as rapeseed while raya 
and African sarson are categorised as mustard. Rapeseed and mustard were grown 
on 43.1 thousand hectares with a production of 69.4 thousand tonnes during 2023-
24 in the State. The average yield was 16.11 quintals per hectare (6.52 quintals per 
acre). Toria, gobhi sarson and African sarson are sown exclusively under irrigated 
conditions, whereas raya can be grown under both irrigated and rainfed conditions. 
Taramira is grown as rainfed crop only.

Climatic Requirements: The rapeseed and mustard crops grow well in areas 
having 25 to 40 cm of rainfall. Taramira is preferred in low-rainfall areas, whereas 
raya, gobhi sarson, African sarson and toria are grown in medium to high rainfall 
areas.

Soil Type: The rapeseed and mustard grow best on well-drained, light-to-
medium textured soils.  Raya, gobhi sarson and African sarson may be grown on all 
soil types, toria should be grown preferably on loamy soils. Taramira does well on 
sandy and loamy-sand soils.
Rotations

Toria: Summer Moong-Toria-Wheat; kharif Fodder-Toria-Wheat; kharif Fodder-
Toria-Sunflower/Potato (spring); kharif Fodder-Toria-Sugarcane-Sugarcane ratoon; 
Rice/Maize-Toria-Sunflower.

Raya: Early Fodder/Maize/Bajra-Raya-summer Moong; Cotton/Rice-Raya.
Gobhi Sarson: Rice/Maize-Gobhi sarson-summer Moong; kharif Fodder/

Groundnut-Toria+Gobhi sarson-summer Moong; Cotton-Gobhi sarson (transplanted).
African Sarson: Maize/Rice/Cotton-African sarson; Moong/Arhar-African 

sarson; Bajra/Guara-African sarson; Groundnut//Sesame-African sarson.
Improved Varieties/ Hybrids

Canola is an internationally accepted nomenclature for Brassica varieties or 
hybrids having less than 2% erucic acid in the oil and less than 30 micro moles 
glucosinolates per gram defatted meal. Such varieties/hybrids are also known as 
double low (‘00’). Oil rich in erucic acid is not desirable for edible purposes as it causes 
thickening of arteries and leads to heart problems. Similarly, the defatted meal of 
non canola varieties when used as animal feed reduces appetite, reproductivity and 
affects thyroid activity leading to thyroid associated health problems. Elimination of 
long chain erucic acid from the oil of canola varieties is accompanied by increase in 
the proportion of desirable MUFA (oleic acid) from 18-20% to about 60-67%. The oil 
from canola varieties is healthy oil for human consumption. The defatted meal from 
such varieties is specially suited as animal feed. Among different varieties/hybrids of 
rapeseed-mustard recommended by the PAU, RLC 3 variety of raya, RCH 1 hybrid  
of raya, GSC 6 and GSC 7 varieties of gobhi sarson and PGSH 1707 hybrid of gobhi 
sarson are of canola type. 

47



Toria
TL 17 (2011): This variety is suitable for multiple cropping systems due to its early 

maturity. It matures in 90 days. It has profuse branching and siliqua bearing capacity. 
Its average yield is 5.2 quintals per acre. Its seeds contain 42.0 per cent oil.

TL 15 (1978): This variety takes about 88 days to mature. Because of its early 
maturity, it fits well in multiple cropping systems. It yields 4.5 quintals per acre. Its oil 
content is 41.0 per cent.
Raya

PHR 127 (2024): It is a medium-tall hybrid with profuse branching and high siliquae 
bearing. It is recommended for general cultivation in Punjab under timely sown and 
irrigated conditions. Its average seed yield is 9.5 quintals per acre, with 39.3 per cent 
oil content. It matures in 140 days.

RCH 1 (2019):  It is the first canola quality (‘00’) hybrid of raya in the country. It 
is recommended for general cultivation in south-western region (Bathinda, Faridkot, 
Ferozepur, Muktsar and Mansa) of Punjab under timely sown irrigated conditions. This 
hybrid is tall with perfuse siliquae bearing. Its average seed yield is 9.2 quintals per 
acre with 39.4 per cent oil content. It matures in 152 days. 

PHR 126 (2019): It is medium tall hybrid with perfuse branching and siliquae 
bearing. It is recommended for general cultivation in south-western region (Bathinda, 
Faridkot, Ferozepur, Muktsar and Mansa) of Punjab under timely sown irrigated 
conditions. Its average seed yield is 9.1 quintals per acre with 40.2 per cent oil content. 
It matures in 145 days. 

Giriraj (2017): This variety is recommended for general cultivation in the state 
under timely sown irrigated conditions. This is a bold seeded variety and has tolerance 
to terminal heat stress. It is moderately resistant to white rust. Its average yield is 7.7 
quintals per acre and it matures in 144 days. It contains 40.3 per cent oil.

RLC 3 (2015):  This is the first canola quality (‘00’) variety of raya in the country. It 
is a yellow seeded, medium tall variety which is recommended for general cultivation in 
the state under timely sown irrigated conditions. It is resistant to white rust. Its average 
seed yield is 7.3 quintals per acre with 41.5 per cent oil content. It matures in 145 days.

PBR 357 (2014): This variety is recommended for general cultivation in the state 
under timely sown irrigated conditions. It is a medium tall variety with more number of 
branches per plant. It is bold seeded variety, moderately tolerant to Alternaria blight 
and white rust diseases. Its average yield is 8.5 quintals per acre. It contains 39.0 per 
cent oil content. It matures in 145 days.

PBR 97 (1997): This variety is recommended for sowing under rainfed conditions 
in the state. It has profuse branching and long main shoot with dense siliquae. The 
grains are medium bold with oil content of 39.8 per cent. On an average, it yields 5.2 
quintals per acre. It matures in 136 days.

PBR 91 (1994): This variety is recommended for cultivation in south-western region 
(Bathinda, Faridkot, Ferozepur, Muktsar and Mansa) of Punjab under timely sown 
irrigated conditions. This variety has profuse branching habit. It has broad, thick, dark 
green leaves. Its seeds are bold and dark brown in colour having 37.6   per cent oil. 

48



Its average yield is 8.1 quintals per acre. It •	 Canola varieties contain less 
matures in 145 days. than 2% erucic acid in oil 
Gobhi Sarson and less than 30 micro moles 

PGSH 2155 (2024): It is a canola quality glucosinolates per gram in 
(‘00’) Gobhi sarson hybrid. It is recommended defatted meal.
for general cultivation in Punjab under timely •	 High erucic acid in oil increases 
sown irrigated conditions. It is free from white the risk of heart diseases 
rust. It is a tall hybrid with profuse branching in humans. Similarly high 
and siliquae bearing. Its average seed yield glucosinolates in defatted meal 
is 9.7 quintals per acre with 41.2 per cent oil reduces appetite, reproductivity 
content. It matures in 156 days. and affects thyroid activity in 

animals.
PGSH 1707 (2020):  It is the canola quality 

(‘00’) hybrid of gobhi sarson. It is recommended •	 Gobhi sarson varieties GSC 6, 
for general cultivation in Punjab under timely GSC 7, hybrid PGSH 1707 and 
sown irrigated conditions. It is resistant to white raya variety RLC 3, hybrid RCH 

1 are canola type.
rust. This hybrid is tall with profuse siliquae 
bearing. Its average seed yield is 8.8 quintals •	 Sow the crop at recommended 
per acre with 41.0 per cent oil content. It time as late sown crop is more 
matures in 162 days. attacked by insect-pests and 

diseases.
GSC 7 (2014): This canola quality (‘00’) •	 Adopt transplanting of gobhi 

variety is recommended for general cultivation sarson and African sarson 
in the state under timely sown irrigated instead of direct sowing under 
conditions. It is a medium tall variety which is late conditions.
free from white rust and is tolerant to Alternaria •	 African sarson variety PC 6 is a 
blight. It has lusterous brownish-black seeds. determinate type  variety which 
Its average yield is 8.9 quintals per acre with can be harvested by combine.
40.5 per cent oil content.   It matures in 154 
days.

GSC 6 (2007): This canola quality (‘00’) variety is recommended for cultivation in the 
state for timely sowing under irrigated conditions.  It has lustrous bold seeds. Its average 
yield is 6.1 quintals per acre with oil content of 39.1 per cent. It matures in 145 days.
African sarson

PC 6 (2016): This variety is the world’s first determinate oilseed Brassica variety. It is 
recommended for general cultivation in the state under timely sown irrigated conditions. 
This medium tall variety is resistant to seed shattering and is suitable for combine 
harvesting. It is free from white rust and has better tolerance to Alternaria blight and 
mustard aphid. Its average yield is 7.7 quintals per acre with 40.1 per cent oil. It matures 
in 157 days.
Taramira

TMLC 2 (1990): This variety is recommended for cultivation in Bathinda, Sangrur, 
Ferozepur and Kandi areas of Hoshiarpur, Gurdaspur, Rupnagar and Shaheed Bhagat 
Singh Nagar districts. It has longer main shoot length, more number of siliquae on 
main shoot and more number of seeds per siliqua. It gives an average seed yield of 2.9 
quintals per acre with 36.6 per cent oil content. It matures in 150 days.

49



Agronomic Practices
Preparatory Tillage: A fine seedbed is required to ensure good germination. 

In irrigated areas, two to four ploughings are required. Planking is done after every 
ploughing. In rainfed areas, one or two ploughings each followed by planking are 
sufficient. Toria in particular requires a fairly moist seedbed for good germination, but 
too moist seedbed impairs its germination.

Zero Tillage Sowing: Rapeseed and mustard crops can also be successfully 
cultivated without preparatory  tillage with zero till drill after the rice harvesting. This 
reduces cost of cultivation and helps in timely sowing of crop after basmati and cotton.

Time of Sowing: The optimum time of sowing for rapeseed and mustard is given 
below:
 Crop Sowing time
Toria  Whole September
Gobhi  Sarson 10-30 October
Raya and African sarson Mid October to Mid November

Gobhi Sarson and African Sarson by transplanting November to Mid December
Taramira Whole October

* 	 When sown mixed with some other crop(s), the time of sowing of rapeseed and mustard is 
governed by the sowing of the main crop. 
Seed Inoculation: Moisten the recommended quantity of seed for one acre of 

any rapeseed mustard crop using minimum amount (50-100 mL) of water and apply 
250 g Pseudomonas putida MLE8 biofertilizer on pucca floor/polyethylene sheet. Dry 
the inoculated seed in shade and sow as early as possible. Seed inoculation with 
this biofertilizer increases seed and oil yield.  This bio-fertilizer is available in Punjab 
Agricultural University, Ludhiana Seed Shop at Gate No. 1 and Krishi Vigyan Kendra/
Farm Advisory Service Centres in different districts.

Seed Rate and Method of Sowing:  When sown as sole crop, 1.5 kg seed per 
acre is sufficient for rapeseed-mustard. In case the soil moisture is inadequate, the 
seed should be mixed  with  moist  soil and kept overnight before sowing. Seed mixed 
with soil increases the bulk and thus ensures uniform distribution in the field. The 
depth of sowing should be 4-5 cm. 

Toria, raya, African sarson and taramira are sown in 30 cm and gobhi sarson in 45 
cm apart rows. For sowing of canola gobhi sarson GSC 6 during November, reduce 
row to row spacing to 30 cm.

These crops are sown with a drill or a pora attached to a plough. Manually 
operated single-row oilseed drill can be used for sowing at the recommended seed 
rate and plant spacing. It ensures uniform placement of seeds at a uniform depth and 
row spacing is maintained with the help of markers provided in the machine. At 3 mm 
exposure length of flutted roller, desired seed rate of about 1.5 kg per acre can be 
achieved. This seed drill can be conveniently used for sowing of rapeseed-mustard 
crops in sugarcane. Tractor drawn dual seed drill for rapeseed-mustard  and wheat 
can be used for sowing of different varieties of toria, raya, gobhi sarson, African sarson 

50



and wheat in the well prepared field as per recommended seed rate. For varying the 
seed rate, exposure length of the flutted roller is adjusted. The flutted roller used in 
this case is a combination of smaller flute and wider flute rollers. Roller with smaller 
flutes is used for sowing rapeseed-mustard and wide flutes roller are used for sowing 
of wheat. The operational speed of tractor drawn dual seed drill should be 3-4 km per 
hour.

Thinning is done three weeks after sowing to maintain plant to plant distance as 
per requirement depending on the crop.  Plant to plant distance of 10 to 15 cm should 
be maintained in case of toria, raya and African sarson, 10 cm in case of gobhi sarson 
and 15 cm for taramira. 

Gobhi Sarson + Oats fodder intercropping: For getting higher productivity and 
monetary returns as compared to sole crop of gobhi sarson, intercrop two rows of 
oats as fodder crop in gobhi sarson sown at 60 cm  row  spacing  by  keeping  plant 
to plant spacing at 7.5 cm. For this purpose, use recommended quantity of seed of 
gobhi sarson and 16 kg seed of oats per acre.  Apply 22 kg urea and 33 kg single super 
phosphate per acre in addition to the recommended dose of fertilizers for sole gobhi 
sarson crop. Harvest the first cut of oats as fodder at 50-55 days after sowing and take 
the second cut 30 days after the first cut.

Transplanting of Gobhi Sarson and African Sarson:  A successful crop of gobhi 
sarson or African sarson can be raised by transplanting. This technique should be 
preferred where sowing is likely to be delayed to November-mid December. For higher 
yield, transplanting should be done in November.
•	 Nursery Raising: Sowing of nursery should be undertaken about 30 days for 

canola gobhi sarson and African sarson ahead of the transplanting period. About 
eight marlas (200 sq. metre) of nursery is sufficient for transplanting in one acre. 
A fine seedbed with adequate soil moisture is necessary for getting good stand of 
nursery. Apply 4.5 kg urea and 4 kg of single super phosphate with last ploughing 
and level it. Broadcast uniformly 400 g seed of gobhi sarson or 600 g seed of African 
sarson and mix it with the help of trangli (toothed rake). Give a light irrigation to the 
nursery bed after about 10 days of germination to be followed by one or two more 
irrigations when needed.

•	 Method of transplanting: After applying pre-sowing irrigation, prepare the field 
well. Draw furrows 45 cm apart for gobhi sarson and 30 cm apart for African sarson. 
Place one seedling at a distance of 10-15 cm. Close the furrows and irrigate the 
field immediately.
Bed planting: Transplanting of gobhi sarson  can also be done on raised beds for 

higher yield (10-15%) and saving (20-25%) of irrigation water. During field preparation, 
broadcast half N and full P before last cultivation. Prepare beds with already 
recommended wheat bed planter. Transplant two rows of gobhi sarson seedlings on 
top portion of the beds by keeping row to row spacing of 30 cm and plant to plant 
spacing of 15 cm. Irrigate the furrows immediately after transplanting. Broadcast the 
remaining half N after first irrigation at  3-4 weeks after transplanting and reshape the 
furrows with the same bed planter. While reshaping, detach the bed planker from the 
bed planter.

51



Fertilizer Application: Apply fertilizers on soil test basis (See Chapter on ‘Soil 
Testing’). In the absence of a soil test, add the following quantity of fertilizers on 
medium fertility soils. However, on loamy sand soils, apply 60 kg N per acre (130 kg 
urea) to gobhi sarson.

Nutrients (kg/acre) Fertilizers (kg/acre)
   Crops

N P2O5 K2O Urea Superphos- Muriate of 
phate Potash

Irrigated Conditions
Toria 25 8 - 55 50 -
Raya, Gobhi sarson and 40 12 # 90 75 #
African sarson (direct 
seeded as well as 
transplanted)

Rainfed Conditions
Raya 15 8 - 33 50 -
Taramira 12 - - 26 - -

# 	 Apply 6 kg K2O (10 kg muriate of potash) per acre to raya, gobhi sarson and African sarson in 
potassium deficient soils only. 

•	 If nitrogen is to be applied in the form of urea, it should be applied just before pre-
sowing  irrigation (rauni).

•	 Prefer phosphorus from single superphosphate as it contains sulphur along 
with phosphorus If this fertilizer is not available, apply @ 80 kg gypsum or 13 kg 
bentonite-S per acre at sowing particularly in sulphur-deficient soils along with 26 
kg DAP and 35 kg urea per acre to supply phosphorus and nitrogen to these soils.

•	 In toria, drill the fertilizers (both N and P2O5) just before sowing under irrigated 
conditions. 

•	 In raya, gobhi sarson and African sarson, drill 1/2 N and full phosphorus and 
potassium before sowing/transplanting and the remaining 1/2 N with first irrigation. 
Under rainfed conditions, drill the fertilizers before sowing to raya and taramira.

•	 In soils testing low in zinc, apply 10 kg zinc sulphate heptahydrate (21%) per acre 
to raya, gobhi sarson and African sarson.
Weed Control: One hoeing to toria three weeks after sowing and one or two 

hoeings preferably with improved wheel hand hoe to raya, gobhi sarson, African 
sarson and taramira are adequate. First 
hoeing should be done 3-4 weeks after •	 Prefer super phosphate as it 
sowing and second, if required 3 weeks after contains sulphur along with 
first hoeing.  Alternatively, apply 350 mL per phosphorous.
acre pendimethalin 38.7 CS in conventional •	 Intercrop gobhi sarson with oats 
sown toria, raya, gobhi sarson and African fodder for higher returns.
sarson within two days of sowing using 200 •	 Avoid water stress at flowering 
litres of water. initiation, pod formation and seed 

filling stages of the crop.

52



Irrigation:  Toria should be sown after heavy rauni and if need arises, one irrigation 
should be given at the time of flower initiation.

Raya and gobhi sarson sown after heavy pre-sowing irrigaton (10-12 cm),  should 
be irrigated 3 to 4 weeks after sowing to promote deeper rooting and for better utilization 
of applied fertilizers.

In raya, if necessary, second irrigation may be given at flowering stage. If the crop 
is threatened by frost damage, the second irrigation may be required earlier.

In gobhi sarson, second irrigation to timely sown crop may be given at the end 
of December or begining of January. The third and the last irrigation be given during 
second fortnight of February. The crop should not be applied any irrigation, thereafter, 
as it may lead to lodging.

Drip Irrigation and Fertigation: Raya and gobhi sarson should be drip irrigated 
at 7 days interval with one lateral placed between two rows of the crop. If laterals are 
placed 60 cm apart with dripper spacing of 30 cm and water discharge of 2.2 litre per 
hour, raya and gobhi sarson should be drip irrigated as per following schedule:

Month Time of irrigation (Minutes)*
Raya Gobhi Sarson

November 60 70
December 55 60

January 40 50
February 45 50
March - 60
The time of irrigation for drippers of different discharge may be adjusted 

proportionally by the formula: 
Adjusted time (min) = (2.2 × Time of irrigation (min)*) ÷ Discharge of dripper (litre per hour)

Fertigation should be started at 15 days after sowing and all fertilizers should 
be applied in 10 equal splits at 7 days interval. Fertigate with 32 kg nitrogen, 10 kg 
phosphorus and 8 kg sulphur per acre through 70 kg urea, 16 kg mono-ammonium 
phosphate and 9 kg elemental sulphur, respectively.

For sub-surface drip irrigation in transplanted gobhi sarson, see chapter on Multiple 
Cropping under Cotton-Gobhi sarson (transplanted) cropping system

Harvesting and Threshing: Harvest the crop when siliquae turn yellow. Raya 
and taramira mature in March and gobhi sarson and African sarson in first fortnight of 
April. Owing to grain shattering in gobhi sarson care should be taken to harvest it at 
the proper time. The harvested crop should be stacked for 7-10 days before threshing. 
Spike tooth type thresher recommended for wheat can also be used for threshing 
of rapeseed-mustard after proper modifications (see Appendix III). For combine 
harvesting of African sarson variety PC 6, harvest the crop at full maturity. Maintain 
cylinder speed of 800 rpm. 

53



Plant Protection 
(a) Insect Pests

1. Painted bug (Bagrada hilaris): It is serious on the germinating crop in October 
and  again on mature crop in March-April. The nymphs and adults suck the sap from 
the foliage and siliquae which subsequenty dry up. Application of first irrigation 3-4 
weeks after sowing reduces the painted bug 
population significantly. •	 Start monitoring the fields 

2. Mustard sawfly (Athalia lugens proxima): for aphid incidence from first 
The larvae attack the young crop, bite holes into week of January.
the leaves and may eat all the leaves in case of •	 Spray in the afternoon when 
heavy attack. It can be managed by spraying 250 pollinators are less active. 
mL Ekalux 25 EC (quinalphos) in 60-80 litres of 
water  per acre.

3.  Mustard aphid (Lipaphis erysimi): Cold and cloudy weather is very favourable 
for the development of mustard aphid. The green plant lice become innumerable, 
covering the inflorescence and siliquae (See Plate No. 4, Page No. 178). They suck the 
plant sap in huge quantities and as a result, the plants remain stunted, siliquae shrivel 
up and seeds do not develop. The following integrated pest management programme 
is recommended for its effective and economic control:
i.	 Sow the crop at recommended time preferably upto 3rd week of October.
ii.	 Apply recommended dose of fertilizers.
iii.	 Apply insecticides on the basis of need by following any of the economic threshold 

levels given below. For determining aphid infestation, observe 12-16 widely 
scattered plants from an acre twice a week starting from first week of January. 
•	 Spray, when pest population reaches, 50-60 aphids per 10 cm terminal portion 

of the central shoot   or
•	 When an average of 0.5 to 1.0 cm terminal portion of central shoot is covered 

by aphids      or
•	 When plants infestation by aphids reach 40-50% (observe 100 plants per acre).
Spray any of the following insecticides using 80-125 litres of water per acre 

depending upon the stage of the crop, and repeat application whenever the above 
mentioned economic threshold values are noticed:

Actara 25 WG  (thiamethoxam)	  40 g
Metasystox 25 EC (oxydemeton methyl)	 400 mL
Rogor 30 EC (dimethoate)	 400 mL
Dursban/Coroban 20 EC (chlorpyriphos)	 600 mL
4. Green peach aphid (Myzus persicae): The green peach aphid attacks taramira 

from December to March with peak activity during February. After the appearance of 
inflorescence, the aphid congregates on terminal buds and feeds there. As a result 
there is flower shedding, poor siliqua formation and shrivelling of grains. 

For its control, sow the crop in second week of October and spray 200 mL Rogor 
30 EC (dimethoate) or 250 mL Metasystox 25 EC (oxydemeton methyl) in 100 litres 

54



of water per acre in third week of February when this aphid starts congregating on top 
flower buds. 

5. Leaf miner (Chromatomyia horticola): Larvae feed by making mines into the 
leaves and cause heavy damage. 

Systemic insecticide Rogor 30 EC (dimethoate) recommended for control of 
mustard aphid should be used for controlling the leaf-miner or apply 13 kg Furadan 3 
G (carbofuran) per acre followed by light irrigation.

6. Hairy caterpillar (Spilosoma obliqua) and cabbage caterpillar (Pieris 
brassicae): The caterpillars feed on leaves, young shoots and green siliquae. When 
young, they feed gregariously but the grown-up caterpillars migrate from one field to 
the other (See Plate No. 5, Page No. 178). When in the gregarious stage, they can be 
easily controlled by picking and destroying the infested leaves. 

Note 
•	 Generally the mustard aphid becomes serious around mid-January, hence greater 

vigilance  is  needed  from  first week of January for monitoring its population at 
regular intervals for deciding the need and time of control measures to be followed.

•	 Spray in the afternoon when the pollinators are less active.
•	 Assure a waiting period of 7 days for thiamethoxam 25 WG, 20 days for chlorpyriphos 

20 EC  and dimethoate 30 EC and 30 days for quinalphos 25 EC after spray on 
Saag crop.

(b) Diseases 
1. Alternaria blight (Alternaria brassicae): Brown to blackish spots with concentric 

rings appear on leaves, siliquae and stems (See Plate No. 6, Page No. 178). In case 
of severe attack, the upper parts of the stem and siliquae wither and contain shrivelled 
seeds.  Temperature in the range of 15-25oC and relative humidity of more than 75% 
favour the disease development. To avoid incidence of this disease, destroy diseased 
debris from the previous crop. 

2. Downy mildew (Peronospora brassicae): Small light green lesions appear on 
the lower  side  of  the  leaves,  which  later enlarge, become  more  greyish, dry up, 
shrivel and tear easily. All aerial parts of the plants are attacked. The disease is severe 
on foliage and seed bearing parts. Greater deformity occurs in the stem. Relative 
humidity of  more than 90% with temperature in the range of 10-20oC are conducive for 
disease development and spread. To avoid incidence of this disease, destroy diseased 
debris from the previous crop. 

3. White rust (Albugo candida): Prominent white creamy-yellow, scattered 
pustules appear on the under surface of the leaves. The swelling of affected parts 
often occurs. Flowers get malformed, become sterile and club shaped (See Plate No. 
7, Page No. 178). All parts are attacked, except roots. Weather conditions of 13-25oC 
temperature and more than 75% relative humidity favour the disease development.  
To avoid incidence of this disease, destroy diseased debris from the previous crop. 
To manage white rust, spray 250 g of Ridomil Gold (metalaxyl 4%+ mancozeb 64%) 
by disolving in 100 litres of water per acre at 60 and 80 days after sowing. If needed, 
repeat the spray after 20 days interval.

55



4. Sclerotinia Stem rot (Sclerotinia sclerotiorum): This soil borne disease 
appears as water soaked lesions on the stem which later on are covered with white 
cottony growth of mycelium. Black coloured sclerotia develop on these lesions as well 
as in the pith of the stem. Upon harvesting, these sclerotia are mixed in soil where 
they can survive for longer period. It appears generally in the month of January when 
the temperature is quite low and soil has abundance of moisture. The sclerotia lying 
under the soil germinate and the mycelium enter the plants. The affected plants look 
wilted, then dry up and stand erect with whitish appearance. If plant canopy is heavy 
then there is breaking of stem also.  To manage this disease, avoid irrigation to the 
rapeseed-mustard crop during 25th December to 15th January.

5. Phyllody (Mycoplasma Like Organisms): Plant parts are malformed. Numerous 
shoots arise and the plants become bushy or broom shaped. Floral parts are 
transformed into leafy structures. Avoid early sowing. Rogue out the affected plants to 
minimise further spread of this disease.

Production of Pure Seed
For seed multiplication, rapeseed-mustard crops  must be sown at safe isolation 

distance. Minimum isolation distance required is 300 m for canola varieties, raya, gobhi 
sarson and African sarson. In case of self-sterile crops such as toria and taramira, 
take seed from randomly selected, healthy and pyramidal plants which are profusely 
branching near the base. For maintaining the purity of largely self-fertile crops such as 
raya, gobhi sarson and African sarson, pull out the off-type plants atleast once before 
flowering and again just before harvesting.
Seed production of Hybrids: The Punjab Agricultural University has recommended 
three hybrids of rapeseed-mustard for cultivation viz; RCH 1 of canola quality raya, 
PHR 126 of raya and PGSH 1707 of canola quality gobhi sarson for cultivation in 
the state. Farmers are required to use fresh hybrid seed (also known as F1 seed) 
every year. The farmer saved seed of previous crop harvest can not be used to raise 
a new crop of these hybrids. The hybrid seed production involves crossing between 
cytoplasmic male sterile (CMS) line or female line (also known as A line) and male or 
pollinator line (also known as R line) in the isolated seed production plots. Female (A) 
and Pollinator (R) lines of the hybrids developed by the PAU can be purchased from 
the PAU. Seed production should be carried out only by trained seed producers under 
the guidance of PAU. Parents of the three recommended hybrids are listed below: 
Crop / Hybrid Female Line (A) Pollinator Line (R)
Raya
PHR 127 CMS-DTM 218 FR-401
RCH 1 CMS-ZM 20 OCRE-4NR
PHR 126 CMS-M 29 FR-AJR 102B
Gobhi sarson
PGSH 2155 CMS-LG 5 FR-ZY 005-2
PGSH 1707 CMS-AG 24 FR-ZY 005

56



Hybrid seed production involves following steps:
A. Raising of seed production plots
i)	 Obtain fresh seed of female (A) and pollinator (R) lines from the Punjab Agricultural 

University every year.
ii)	 The quantity of seed required for sowing one acre of seed plot is about 500 g of 

female (A)  line and 300 g of pollinator (R) line. 
iii)	 Select an isolated field which is at least 1500 meters away from other raya/gobhi 

sarson fields. It must be ensured that no crop of raya or gobhi sarson was sown in 
the selected field for at least three previous years.      

iv)	 Following ratio of female (A) and pollinator (R) lines in the hybrid seed production 
of raya and gobhi sarson should be followed:

                    Raya               : 6 rows of female (A) line: 2 rows of pollinator (R) line
                    Gobhi sarson  : 4 rows of female (A) line: 2 rows of pollinator (R) line

This means that two rows of the pollinator (R) line are planted after six rows of 
the female (A) line for production of hybrid seeds in raya. Recommended row to row 
spacing for raya is 30 cm. For gobhi sarson hybrid, two rows of pollinator (R) line 
should be sown after four rows of female (A) line at row to row spacing 45 cm.  Plant to 
plant spacing of 10-12 cm should be maintained by thinning at about two weeks after 
sowing in both raya and gobhi sarson.

Sowing of pollinator (R) line should be carried out first in the entire seed production 
plot and thereafter sowing of female (A) line should be carried out. It is also advisable 
to leave one row vacant on both sides of all the row pairs of pollinator (R) line to avoid 
accidental spillover of pollinator seeds to the female (A) line. It is also recommended 
to sow a strip of pollinator (R) line on all sides of seed production block to augment the 
pollen supplies. 
v)	 Cultural practices recommended for cultivation of respective crops may be followed 

for hybrid seed production. 
B. Maximizing pollination on female (A) line through effective synchronization 

of flowering
i)	 The pollinator (R) line FR-ZY 005 of   PGSH 1707 (canola gobhi sarson  hybrid)  and 

FR-AJR 102B of PHR 126 (raya) are  about  4-7 days late to flower as compared 
to their respective female (A) line. It may be desirable to achieve complete 
synchronization between the pollinator (R) line and female (A) line by de-topping 
the main shoots of plants in the female (A) line in timely sown (second fortnight of 
October) crop. De-topping is to be carried out just after the initiation of the main 
flowering shoot. De-topping of main shoot of female (A) line of canola raya hybrid 
and for late (after 10th November) sown crop (all hybrids) is generally not required.

ii)	 Additional dose of urea @ 7.5 kg per acre (over and above the normal recommended 
dose) may be applied between the pollinator (R) line after first irrigation to improve 
vigour and height of pollinator plants.

C.	 Rogueing
The off-type plants, if any, in female (A) line and pollinator (R) line should be 

57



removed before flowering. Rogueing of male contaminants (caused by accidental 
seed spill over from pollinator (R) line during sowing from female (A) line is strongly 
recommended. Rogueing may be carried during early hours of the day. It should be 
continued till all plants in the female (A) line have flowered.
D.	 Harvesting and packing
i)	 The pollinator (R) line should be harvested immediately after flowering is complete 

in both female (A) line and pollinator (R) line to avoid mechanical contamination of 
hybrid seed due to shattering in male line.

ii)	 The seed set on female (A) line is the hybrid seed and it should be harvested, 
threshed and graded separately. We recommend an additional round of rougeing 
of off-type plants before harvesting the female (A) line.

iii)	 Pack the seeds in dry bags and store them in moisture free store.
iv)	 Hybrid seed of about 3.0-3.5 quintals per acre is expected under timely sown 

conditions.

	 LINSEED
Linseed cultivation is mainly confined to Gurdaspur, Hoshiarpur and Rupnagar 

districts adjoining the main linseed growing area of Himachal Pradesh. The low yield 
can be stepped up by adopting the recommended package of practices.

Climatic Requirements:  It does well in high rainfall areas.
Soil Type: A well-drained, loamy to clay soil is suitable.
Rotation: Rice-Linseed.

Improved Variety
LC 2063 (2007): It is a tall variety with profuse branching and blue flowers. It is 

tolerant to wilt, rust, Alternaria blight and moderately resistant to powdery mildew. It 
has lustrous brown, bold seeds with 38.4 per cent oil content. Its average yield is 4.9 
quintal per acre. It matures in about 158 days.

LC 2023 (1998): It is recommended for both rainfed and irrigated conditions.  It is a 
tall variety having blue flowers and profuse capsule bearing. It has brown medium sized 
seeds.  It is tolerant to wilt, rust, Alternaria blight and moderately resistant to powdery 
mildew. Its seed contains 37.4 per cent oil. Its yield is about 4.5 quintal per acre. It 
matures in 158 and 163 days under rainfed and irrigated conditions, respectively.

Agronomic Practices
Preparatory Tillage: The land should be prepared by giving two or three 

ploughings, depending on the intensity of weeds.
Sowing Time and Method of  Sowing: Linseed  is  sown  in  the  first  fortnight   of  

October with  drill  or pora  at  a  depth  of 4 to 5 cm in rows 23 cm apart. Plant spacing 
in the row is 7 to 10 cm. Linseed can also be raised without any tillage operation with 
zero till drill after rice.   

Seed Rate:  Use 15 kg seed per acre.

58



Fertilizer Application:  Apply 25 kg N (55 kg of urea) and 16 kg P2O5 (100 kg 
superphosphate) per acre at sowing. Prefer phosphorus from superphosphate.

Weed Control: Two hoeings preferably with improved wheel hand hoe should be 
done at three and six weeks after sowing. 

Irrigation: Depending upon the rains during the crop season, linseed requires 3-4 
irrigations. Irrigation at flowering initiation is essential.

Production of Pure Seed: The off-type plants should be removed at the time of 
flowering and again at harvesting. The flowers of LC 2063 and  LC 2023 are blue.

Harvesting: The crop is ready for harvest in April.
Plant Protection 
(a) Insect Pest 

1. Lucerne caterpillar: This insect may cause damage by feeding on the leaves. 
(b) Diseases 

1. Rust (Melampsora lini): Pink fungal sori appear on the surface of leaves, stems 
and pods. Grow resistant varieties like LC 2023 and LC 2063. 

2. Wilt (Fusarium oxysporum): Young seedlings die when attacked. Full grown 
plants show yellowing of leaves and later wilt and die. Grow tolerant varieties like LC 
2023 and LC 2063.

3. Powdery Mildew  (Erysiphe cichoracearum): A greyish white powdery growth 
on the youngest growing tips is the first  visible symptom of this disease. In case of 
severe infection, the fungus attacks branches, leaves and flowers. It causes heavy 
loss owing to the defoliation of infected plants which leads to the shrivelling of grains.

SUNFLOWER

The spring season is the most suited for assured crop and high yields of sunflower. 
Availability of honey bees during this season in abundance, also helps in good seed 
setting.  Sunflower oil is very well suited for the manufacture of edible refined oil and 
vanaspati. Its oil can also be used for making soap and a number of allied products. 
During 2023-24, sunflower was grown on 0.9 thousand hectares with a production of  
1.8 thousand tonnes and average yield of 20.22 quintals per hectare (8.18 quintal per 
acre).

Soil Type:  It requires well drained, medium textured soil. Avoid salt affected soils.
Rotations: Rice/Maize-Potato-Sunflower; Rice-Toria-Sunflower; Cotton-Sunflower; 

Sugarcane-Sugarcane ratoon-Sunflower and kharif Fodder-Toria-Sunflower. 
Basmati-Sunflower is more productive and remunerative as compared to prevalent 
Basmati-Wheat crop sequence.

59



Hybrids 
PSH 2080 (2019): It is a short duration medium tall hybrid with average plant 

height of 151 cm. The average seed yield of this hybrid is 9.8 quintals per acre. The 
seeds of this hybrid are black and elongated with 100 seed weight of 5.8 g. The oil 
content of this hybrid is 43.7 per cent. It matures in 97 days. 

PSH 1962 (2015): It is a short duration, medium tall hybrid with average plant 
height of 165 cm. The average seed yield of this hybrid is 8.2 quintals per acre. The 
seeds of this hybrid are black and bold with 100 seed weight of 6.4 g. The oil content 
of this hybrid is 41.9 per cent. It matures in 99 days.

DK 3849 (2013): It is a tall hybrid with an average plant height of 172 cm. The 
average seed yield of this hybrid is 8.4 quintals per acre and 100 seed weight is 4.5 g. 
The seeds of this hybrid contain about 34.5 per 
cent oil. It matures in 102 days. •	 Hybrids PSH 2080 and PSH 

PSH 996 (2012): It is a short duration medium 1962 have high oil content, 
tall hybrid with an average plant height of 141 shorter duration and 
cm. The average seed yield of this hybrid is 7.8 medium-tall stature. 
quintals per acre. The seeds are black and bold •	 For higher yield and water 
with 100 seed weight of 6.8 g. The oil content of saving, sowing should be 
this hybrid is 35.8 per cent. It matures in 96 days. completed by end of January.
This hybrid is also suitable for growing under late •	 Treat the seeds before 
sown conditions. sowing with recommended 
Other hybrids in cultivation: fungicide.
Pioneer 64 A 57: Not tested by the Punjab •	 In fields infested with 
Agricultural University. cutworm (particularly after 
Champ: Not tested by the Punjab Agricultural potato), crop should be 
University. sown on ridges.

Armony Gold: Not tested by the Punjab •	 Avoid water stress at 
Agricultural University. flowering and dough stages.

NSFH-1001: It is tall, medium duration hybrid 
having high oil content. However, its seed size is small.
Agronomic Practices

Land Preparation: Two or three ploughings, followed by planking, are necessary 
to get a fine seed bed for sunflower.

Seed Rate: Use 2 kg seed per acre. 
Seed Treatment: Treat the seeds before sowing with Tagron 35 WS (metalaxyl) 

@ 6 g per kg seed.
Seed Inoculation: Moisten the recommended quantity of seed for one acre 

of sunflower crop using 50 mL water and apply 250 g biofertilizer (Bacillus aerius 
SLE1 and Pseudomonas putida SRB1) on pucca floor/polyethylene sheet. Dry the 
inoculated seed in shade and sow as early as possible. Seed inoculation with this 
biofertilizer increases seed and oil yield. This bio-fertilizer is available in Punjab 
Agricultural University, Ludhiana Seed Shop at Gate No. 1 and Krishi Vigyan Kendra/
Farm Advisory Service Centres in different districts.

60



Time of Sowing: To realize high seed yield and  to  save   irrigation  water, the 
sowing of sunflower should be done in January. However, if the planting is delayed till 
first week of February, shorter duration hybrids (PSH 2080, PSH 1962, PSH 569 and 
PSH 996) should be preferred. However, for further delay in the month of February 
adopt transplanting because direct seeding causes substantial reduction in seed yield. 
Delayed sowing of crop in the second fortnight of February or in the month of March by 
direct seeding reduces seed setting and results in increased quantity of unfilled seeds 
due to rise in temperature at the time of pollination. Delayed sowing also increases the 
incidence of pests and diseases. 

Method of Sowing: Sow the seed 4-5 cm deep, in rows 60 cm apart with plant-
to-plant spacing of 30 cm. Row crop planter (inclined plate) can be conveniently used 
for flat or ridge sowing of sunflower seeds (See Appendix III). Carry out thinning a 
fortnight after germination, if needed. Earlier sown crop performs well when planted on 
southern side of east-west ridges. Place the seed about 6-8 cm below the ridge top. 
Apply irrigation to ridge sown crop 2-3 days after sowing. Take care that water level in 
the ridges remains well below the seed placement line. The crop sown on ridges does 
not lodge and it also helps to save the water during hot summer months.
Nursery Raising and Transplanting

When sowing is likely to be delayed to second fortnight of February, the crop 
should be raised by transplanting the nursery for getting higher yield and early maturity 
than that of direct seeded crop. About 30 sq.m. of nursery area is sufficient to raise 
seedlings for transplanting in one acre. Nursery should be raised by sowing 1.5 kg 
seed 30 days before transplanting in well prepared seed-bed after mixing 0.5 kg urea 
and 1.5 kg superphosphate. Cover the seed-bed with a thin layer of well decomposed 
FYM. Give a light irrigation and cover the seed-bed with transparent polythene sheet 
in the form of a tunnel by giving support with sticks. Remove the polythene sheet 
gradually after seedling emergence. Irrigate the nursery before uprooting. Transplant 
one seedling at 4-leaf stage at a distance of 30 cm in 60 cm apart rows and irrigate 
the field.

Intercropping:  Mentha can be successfully intercropped with sunflower. Sow 
two rows of mentha in end January between two rows of sunflower grown at 120 cm x 
15 cm in north-south direction. Use 150 kg of mentha suckers per acre. In addition to 
fertilizers recommended to sunflower, apply 23 kg N (50 kg urea) and 12 kg P2O5 (75 
kg single super phosphate) per acre. Full phosphorus and half nitrogen be applied at 
planting and remaining half nitrogen at 40 days after planting.

Fertilizer Application: Sunflower following toria should be applied with 10 tonnes 
of farmyard manure (FYM) per acre along with the recommended fertilizers. However, 
sunflower grown after potato receiving 20 tonnes FYM per acre requires 12 kg N (25 
kg urea).

In general, use 24 kg N (50 kg urea) per acre along with 12 kg P2O5 (75 kg single 
superphosphate) at sowing. In coarse textured soils, apply 24 kg N (50 kg urea)  per 
acre to sunflower in two equal splits i.e. 1/2 at sowing and 1/2, 30 days after sowing. 
Also drill 12 kg K2O (20 kg muriate of potash) on soils testing low in K. In Hoshiarpur, 
Shaheed Bhagat Singh Nagar and Rupnagar districts apply 24 kg K2O (40 kg muriate 

61



of potash) per acre. Prefer superphosphate for phosphorus application as it also 
contains sulphur.

Irrigation: Sunflower generally requires 6-9 irrigations depending upon the soil 
type, rain and weather prevalent. Apply first irrigation about a month after sowing in 
case of flat sowing and reduce the intervals to 2 weeks during March and to 8-10 
days during hot summer months of April-May. Stop irrigations about 12-14 days before 
harvest. The crop stages such as 50% flowering, soft and hard dough stages are very 
critical for irrigation and irrigation missed at these stages reduces seed yield by 21-25 
%. Avoid moisture stress to the crop at these critical stages.

Drip Irrigation and Fertigation: This method is very useful for getting higher yield 
and saving of water and fertilizer. For this purpose, sow the crop on ridges spaced 60 
cm apart with plant to plant distance of 30 cm. After sowing, lay down one lateral pipe 
having drippers at 30 cm spacing on each ridge. Apply irrigation at three days interval 
starting from one month of sowing. The month wise irrigation time for dripper discharge 
of 2.2 litre per hour is as under:

Month Time of irrigation (Minutes)*
March 35
April 75
May 86

If discharge rate is different than 2.2 litre per hour, then time of irrigation must be 
revised by the formula:
Adjusted time (minutes) = (2.2 × Time of irrigation (minutes)*) ÷ Discharge of dripper (litre/
hour)

Apply 8 kg urea and 12 kg superphosphate per acre at sowing. Also apply 20 kg 
muriate of potash per acre on soils testing low in K. In Hoshiarpur, Rupnagar and 
Shaheed Bhagat Singh Nagar districts apply 40 kg muriate of potash per acre. Starting 
from one month after sowing, apply 32 kg urea and 12 litres of orthophosphoric acid 
(88%) in 5 equal installments with drip irrigation system within next 45 days. 

Earthing up: To overcome the problem of lodging, earthing up should be done in 
case of both flat and ridge sown crops. It may be done when the crop is 60-70 cm tall 
but before flowering.

Weed Control: The first hoeing should be done 2-3 weeks after the emergence 
followed by second hoeing three weeks thereafter. Mechanical cultivation is possible in 
this crop before the plants grow 60-70 cm tall. An improved three tine wheel hand-hoe 
can be used for hoeing. 

Harvesting and Threshing: The crop is ready for harvesting when heads turn 
yellowish-brown at lower surface near the stalk and the discs start drying up. At this 
stage, the seeds give blackish look and are fully ripe. The harvested sunflower heads 
can be threshed immediately after harvesting by a sunflower thresher when the heads 
are relatively moist. However, the performance of the sunflower thresher is better 
when the crop is dry. After threshing seed should be dried thoroughly before storing, 
otherwise they are liable to get affected by fungus.

62



Plant Protection 
(a) Insect Pests

1. Cutworms (Agrotis spp.): This insect may be serious during March-April in fields 
where sunflower follows potato. Caterpillars cut the seedlings at the ground level. Sow 
the crop on ridges to avoid cutworm damage in the germinating seedlings. 

2. Tobacco caterpillar (Spodoptera litura)  and Bihar hairy caterpillar (Spilosoma 
obliqua): These are serious during April-May and defoliate the plants. Young larvae 
feed gregariously but the grown-up caterpillars spread throughout the field and migrate 
from one field to the other.

To control these pests, egg masses and young larvae feeding gregariously should 
be collected along with infested leaves and destroyed. Grown up larvae of hairy 
caterpillar can also be managed by spray of 300 mL Superkiller 10 EC (cypermethrin) 
per acre in 100 litres of water.

Caution: Spray should be done in the evening when the non-target organisms including 
honeybees and predatory arthropods are less active.

3. Head borer or American bollworm (Helicoverpa armigera): It is a serious pest 
of sunflower and causes heavy damage by  feeding  on  the  tissues  and  developing  
grains in the head. 
(b) Diseases

1. Stem rot  (Sclerotium rolfsii, Sclerotinia sclerotiorum): The pathogens attack 
basal part of the stem. However, when S. sclerotiorum is predominant, it can cover 
the entire plant parts, including the head as evident by the white cottony growth. 
The sclerotia of this pathogen, almost of the size of sunflower seed, are produced in 
abundance which are visible in the pith of rotten stem and infected head. The affected 
tissue turns black and shredded. Warm (12-20oC) and moist weather conditions favour 
the disease development. Use disease free seed.

2. Root rot or Charcoal rot  (Macrophomina phaseolina): Infection at early stages 
kills the seedlings rapidly. At later stages, it causes premature ripening, small sized 
heads, poor filling and reduction in yield. Avoid moisture stress to the crop.

3. Head rot  (Rhizopus oryzae, R. stolonifer, Sclerotinia sclerotiorum): The 
symptoms are visible on any part of the receptacle, usually starting from the stalk. 
Severely affected heads show shredding of the tissue and incomplete filling. The rot 
may be partial or complete. Seeds formed in affected heads are highly shrivelled 
causing considerable reduction in yield and oil content. 

4. Downy mildew (Plasmopara halstedii): Plants remain severely stunted, leaves 
become thick with green and yellow patches visible from upper side. White cottony 
shining downy growth of fungus appears on lower surface of the leaves. Leaves 
become necrotic and plants develop small and empty heads. Treat sunflower seeds 
with Tagron 35 WS (metalaxyl) @ 6 g per kg seed. Fungicide should be applied by 
making slurry in water and seeds should be dried before sowing.
(c) Birds

See Chapter - “Management of Rodents and Birds”.
63



Seed production of Hybrids
Fresh seed of hybrids have to be used every year. The hybrid seed production 

involves crossing of male or pollinator parent with cytoplasmic male sterile (CMS) line 
or female line in the isolated seed production plot. The female line and the pollinator 
line of any hybrid are commonly termed as ‘A’ line and ‘R’ line, respectively. Male and 
female parents of the hybrids developed by the PAU can be purchased from the PAU. 
Seed production should be carried out only by the trained seed producers under the 
guidance of PAU. The parents of different sunflower hybrids are as under : 
Hybrid	 Female Line (A) Pollinator Line (R)

PSH 2080 CMS 67A P160R

PSH 1962 CMS 67A P 93R

PSH 996 CMS 11A P 93R

Following steps are involved in the production of hybrid seed:
•	 Obtain fresh seed of female (A) and pollinator (R) parent from the Punjab 

Agricultural University every year.
•	 The quantity of seed required for sowing one acre of seed plot is 1.5 kg of the 

female (A) line and 0.5 kg of pollinator (R) line.
•	 Select an isolated field which is located at least 400 meters away from another 

sunflower field. It must be ensured that no crop of sunflower had been sown in the 
selected field in the previous year. 

•	 The ratios of A and R lines should be kept 3:1, i.e., after every three rows of A 
line, one row of R line should be sown. Distance between lines should be 60 cm. 
However, the first two border rows on either side should be sown with R line for 
adequate supply of pollens. 

•	 To enhance seed production of PSH 1962, its pollinator (R) line, P 93 R should be 
sown 4-5 days earlier than the female (A) line, CMS 67 A. Similarly for enhanced 
seed production of PSH 2080, its pollinator (R) line, P 160 R should be sown 5-6 
days earlier than the female (A) line, CMS 67 A.

•	 Cultural practices recommended for cultivation of crop should be followed for seed 
production.

•	 The off type plants, if any, in the A and R lines should be removed before flowering. 
Pollen shedders if any, in A line should be removed just at the initiation of flowering. 
Roguing of pollen shedders is to be continued till the majority of plants have 
flowered. Remove all late flowering plants.

•	 To improve the pollination and better seed setting in the female parent, honey 
bee colonies may be placed near the seed plots. To further increase the quantity 
of hybrid seed, hand pollination can be done. This can be achieved by following 
procedure : 

64



•	 Collect the pollen from the pollinator (R) plants in a dry plastic or metallic 
container by shaking the heads. 

•	 Apply the pollen gently to the flowers of female (A) line by using soft brush or 
cotton/ silk pad. 

•	 The R line should be harvested first and ensure that no plant from R line is left in 
the field. 

•	 The seed set on A line is the hybrid seed which should be harvested and threshed 
separately. The seed should be dried to moisture content of less than 9.0%. 

•	 The packing of seed should be done in moisture proof bags. The seed is to be 
stored in pucca stores which are moisture free. Under such conditions the seed 
remains viable for about 10 months and thereafter it losses germinability and 
cannot be used for next sowing. 

•	 The seed of sunflower remains dormant for about 45 days after harvesting the 
crop and thus cannot be used for sowing during this period. The germination of 
seed must be got tested before sowing and it should be used for sowing only if the 
germination is 70 per cent or more. 

•	 On an average, 2.5 quintal hybrid seed per acre is obtained.

65



4. SUGAR CROPS
SUGARCANE

Sugarcane occupied 90.2 thousand hectares in Punjab during 2023-24. The 
average cane yield was 832.5 quintals per hectare (337 quintals per acre). The average 
sugar recovery was 9.38 per cent.

Important Hints
Plant crop
•	 Do not plant the crop in a field where the preceding crop was infected with red rot or wilt.
•	 Use seed cane from a healthy and completely disease free seed crop. 
•	 Use recommended seed rate to ensure good stand of the crop. 
•	 Avoid late planting. It reduces tillering and the crop is more prone to attack by insect 

pests, especially shoot borer. 
•	 Keep the crop free from weeds using cultural control measures and recommended 

chemicals. 
•	 Do not apply excessive dose of nitrogen than recommended. Over dose will cause 

lodging of the crop, resulting in poor cane yield and quality. 
•	 Do not allow the crop to suffer from water stress especially during hot months. 
•	 To prevent lodging, earth up the crop in May-June and prop up the crop during August-

September. 
Ratoon crop
•	 Do not ratoon a diseased crop. 
•	 Do not harvest the crop to be ratooned before the end of January. Harvest the crop 

as close to the ground as possible. 
•	 Remove the trash and irrigate the field. 
•	 Remove late tillers and water shoots. 
•	 Interculture the crop with tractor drawn tillers or rotary weeder to control weeds 

during early stages of growth. Alternatively, adopt chemical control measures. 
•	 Fill the gaps by planting three budded setts in the beginning of March. 
•	 Inspect the ratoon crop regularly to prevent the attack of early shoot borer and 

black bug, as it is more prone to damage by these insects. 
Hints for obtaining high sugar recovery
•	 Do not plant whole area under a single variety. Plant recommended early and mid-

late maturing varieties in the ratio of 3:2 on area basis. 
•	 Save the crop from lodging by timely earthing up and propping. 
•	 Save the crop from diseases and insect pests through recommended control 

measures. 

66



•	 Protect the crop from frost by giving light irrigations.
•	 Avoid excessive irrigation and late application of nitrogen near crop maturity. 
•	 Harvest the crop at proper maturity. Ratoon crop should be harvested first.
•	 Ensure removal of roots, mud, trash and immature tops (spindles) at the time of 

harvest. 
•	 Supply cane to sugar mills without excessive binding material, immediately after 

harvesting as staling reduces sugar recovery. 
Climatic Requirements 

Sugarcane is best suited to regions having tropical climate, but it can be grown 
successfully in sub-tropical areas also. In the Punjab, about 80 per cent of the total 
growth of the crop takes place during July, August and September owing to favourable 
temperature and humidity.
Soil Type 

Sugarcane can be successfully grown on all types of soils ranging from sandy 
loam to clay loam. However, it thrives best on well-drained loamy soils. Sugarcane is 
semi-tolerant to sodicity and salinity. Sustainable sugarcane yields with assured levels 
of sugar recovery can be successfully obtained in sodic and saline-sodic soil/irrigation 
water conditions by adopting the following practices:
•	 If the soil/irrigation water is sodic, apply gypsum @ 50% of gypsum requirement 

on cumulative basis after the harvest of the previous crop or well decomposed 
farm yard manure @ 8 tonnes per acre before sowing. Higher and complimentary 
benefits can be obtained if both gypsum and FYM are used simultaneously. 

•	 Do not apply gypsum if the soil/irrigation water is saline or saline-sodic. Apply only 
FYM. 

•	 Under saline water conditions in south-western districts of Punjab, CoJ 88 should 
be planted. 

Spring Sugarcane
Rotations 

Rice (short duration) – Rabi fodder/Potato - Sugarcane - ratoon I - ratoon II - 
Wheat, Rice / kharif fodder - Toria / Raya - Sugarcane - ratoon I - ratoon II - Wheat, 
Maize/Cotton-Senji - Sugarcane - ratoon I - ratoon II - Wheat, Arhar - Oat/Senji - fodder 
- Sugarcane - ratoon I - ratoon - II - Wheat
Improved Varieties
1. Early-Maturing Varieties

CoPb 95 (2021): The canes of this variety are tall, thick* with zigzag internode 
alignment and purplish green in colour with broader leaf canopy.   Its’ juice contains 
17% sucrose in the month of December. It has field resistance to the prevalent 
pathotypes of red rot disease, moderately resistant to smut and also less susceptible 
* Medium thin, medium thick and thick canes mean diameter up to 1.5 cm, 1.5 to 2.5 cm and above 
2.5 cm, respectively.

67



to top borer.   It is a good ratooner, non-lodging •	 CoPb 95, CoPb 96, Co 15023, 
and frost tolerant. The average cane yield is CoPb 98, CoPb 92, Co 118, 
about 425 quintals per acre. CoJ 85, CoPb 93 and CoPb 

CoPb 96 (2021): The canes of this variety 94, CoPb 91, Co 238 and CoJ 
are medium thick, cylindrical and yellowish 88 are tolerant to most of the 
green in colour. Its’ juice contains 16-17% and prevalent  pathotypes of red 
18% sucrose in the months of November and rot disease.
December, respectively. It is a good ratooner. It 
is tolerant to the prevalent pathotypes of red rot •	 Gur (jaggery) from CoPb 96, 
disease. Quality of gur is very good. The average CoPb 92, Co 118, CoJ 64 and 
cane yield is about 382 quintals per acre. CoJ 88 is of excellent quality.

Co 15023 (2021): The canes of this variety are •	 Seed rate of Co 118 and CoJ 
medium thick, cylindrical and yellowish green in 85 should be kept 10% higher 
colour.  Its’ juice contains 16-17 and 18% sucrose on weight basis.
in the month of   November and December, 
respectively. It is tolerant to the prevalent 
pathotypes of red rot disease. The average cane yield is about 310 quintals per acre.

CoPb 92 (2017): The canes of this variety are tall, medium thick and purple green 
in colour. Its juice contains 16-17% sucrose in the month of November and 18% in 
December.  It is a good ratooner. It is tolerant to most of the prevalent pathotypes of 
red rot disease and frost. Quality of gur is also good. The average cane yield is about 
335 quintals per acre. 

Co 118 (2015): It has thick, purple green coloured canes. Its juice contains 16% 
sucrose in the month of November and 17% in December. It has field resistance to 
the prevalent pathotypes of red rot disease. It is a shy tillering variety and an average 
ratooner. Its gur quality is excellent. The average cane yield is about 320 quintals per 
acre. 

CoJ 85 (2000): It is a shy tillering variety with thick* green coloured canes. Its juice 
contains 16-17% sucrose in the month of November and 18-18.5% in December. It is 
tolerant to most of the prevalent pathotypes of red rot disease and is tolerant to frost. It 
is an average ratooner and susceptible to red stripe disease. Due to its heavy canes it 
is prone to lodging, hence requires proper earthing up. The average cane yield of plant 
crop is about 305 quintals per acre. 

CoJ 64 (1975): This variety is a good germinator, with profuse tillering and medium-
compact growth. Its canes are medium thick, greenish yellow and solid. The sucrose 
content in juice in November is 16-17%. It has become highly susceptible to red-rot 
disease and also to top borer. Its quality of gur is excellent. The average cane yield is 
about 300 quintals per acre. 
2. Mid-Late  Maturing Varieties

CoPb 98 (2021): The canes of this variety are tall, thick, cylindrical and yellowish 
green in colour. Its’ juice contains 17% and 19% sucrose in the months of January and 
March, respectively. It is a good ratooner. It is tolerant to the prevalent pathotypes of 
red rot disease. The average cane yield is about 400 quintals per acre. 

68



CoPb 93 (2017): The canes of this variety are tall, thick and yellowish white in 
colour. Its juice contains 17% sucrose in the month of January and 19% in March. It is 
a good ratooner. It is tolerant to the prevalent pathotypes of red rot disease. Quality of 
gur is also good. The average cane yield is about 390 quintals per acre. 

CoPb 94 (2017): The canes of this variety are tall, thick, cylindrical and yellowish 
green in colour. Its juice contains 16% and 19% sucrose in the months of January and 
March, respectively. It is a good ratooner. It is tolerant to the prevalent pathotypes of 
red rot and smut diseases. The average cane yield is about 400 quintals per acre.

Co 238 (2015): The canes of this variety are tall, medium thick and yellow green in 
colour. Its juice contains 17% sucrose in the month of January. It is susceptible to top 
borer and tolerant to the prevalent pathotypes of red rot disease. It is a good ratooner. 
Quality of gur is also good. The average cane yield is about 365 quintals per acre. The 
crushing of this variety by sugarmills can be done along with early maturing varieties.

CoPb 91 (2014): The canes of this variety are tall, thick and yellowish green in 
colour. Its juice contains 17% sucrose in the month of January. It is tolerant to the 
prevalent pathotypes of red rot disease. It is a good ratooner. Its average cane yield is 
about 410 quintals per acre. 

CoJ 88 (2002): The canes of this variety are tall, medium thick and greyish green in 
colour. Its juice contains 17-18% sucrose in the month of December. It tends to behave 
as early-mid in maturity and is also suitable for saline water conditions. It is tolerant to 
the prevalent pathotypes of red rot disease. It is an excellent ratooner. It is good for co-
generation. Quality of gur is excellent. The average cane yield of the plant crop is about 
335 quintals per acre. 
Unrecommended variety:

Co 89003: This is an early maturing variety. It is highly susceptible to wilt disease 
and root borer which reduce its sugar recovery.
Agronomic Practices

Sub-soiling: Cross sub-soiling at 1.0 m spacing should be done once in three to 
four years, before preparing the field. This is done by tractor drawn sub-soiler, upto a 
depth of 45-50 cm. Do planking to break the clods and then prepare seed bed. This 
will help in breaking the hard pan, increase water infiltration rate and better penetration 
of roots.

Land Preparation: Give three to four ploughings, each followed by planking. Use 
a furrow turning plough for the first ploughing. If the crop is to be sown after harvesting 
of senji (fodder), 3 to 4 ploughing are enough for seed bed preparation.

Time of Planting: Mid-February to the end of March is the optimum time for 
planting sugarcane in the Punjab. Do not plant early maturing varieties after March. 
Avoid late planting. If late planting has to be done, adopt the following practices:
•	 In case of late planting, any mid late maturing variety should be preferred. 
•	 Use higher seed-rate, viz. 30 thousand three-budded sets per acre. 
•	 Control the early shoot-borer effectively as it is particularly serious in the late-

planted crop. 
69



Seed Selection: The seed should be free from red-rot, wilt, smut, ratoon-stunting 
and grassy shoot diseases. Use only the top two-third portion of the selected canes 
for planting.

Seed Rate: Use 20 thousand three-budded setts or 15 thousand four-budded sets 
or 12 thousand five-budded setts per acre. Longer setts are particularly good for rain-
fed conditions. In other words, 30-35 quintal of seed, depending upon the variety, is 
required for sowing one acre. Due to thick canes, seed rate of Co 118 and CoJ 85 
should be kept about 10% higher (on weight basis). 

Seed Treatment: To improve the germination, soak the setts in ethrel solution 
overnight. To prepare the solution, dissolve 25 mL  of Ethrel 39 SL in 100 liters of water. 
Alternatively,  soak the setts in water for 24 hours before planting.
Spacing and Planting Techniques 

1. Trench Planting: Plant crop in rows 75 cm apart and 20-25 cm deep trenches. 
After placing the setts in trenches, cover the setts with 5 cm soil. Apply irrigation 
immediately after planting, if the planting is not done under proper moisture (watter)
conditions. Repeat the irrigation at 4-5 days interval. 

2. Paired Row Trench Planting: Adopt paired row trench planting for saving 
irrigation water. Plant two rows of sugarcane 30 cm apart in 20-25 cm deep trenches. 
Place the cane setts at the bottom of the trenches and cover with the soil left in between 
two rows. Distance between two trenches should be 90 cm. Trenches can be drawn 
using tractor operated PAU designed trencher. In addition to water saving, this method 
gives comparatively higher cane yield, easy propping up operation and reduces lodging.

Use tractor operated paired row trench planter to sow paired rows of 
sugarcane in trenches. The complete sugarcane, is fed by two labourers sitting 
on the machine, is cut automatically into pieces before dropping in the furrows, 
fertilizer is applied simultaneously. Length of setts varies from 36 to 38 cm. The 
speed of operation is 2-3 km/h. Capacity of machine varies from 2-3 acres per day.

For ease of mechanical harvesting with sugarcane harvester, the crop should 
be planted at either 120 cm row spacing or by 120:30 cm paired row trench method.

3. Furrow Irrigated Raised Bed Planting (FIRB): Sugarcane can also be planted 
in standing wheat crop sown by furrow irrigated raised bed (FIRB) planter. The furrow 
should be reshaped in January to loosen the soil. Apply irrigation in reshaped furrows 
preferably in the evening before planting. Plant treated sugarcane setts next day by 
pressing under feet. Sugarcane is planted in pre-opened furrows between the beds, 
using treated 3 budded setts, during the second fortnight of February to March.

4. Sugarcane Cutter Planter: Use two-row tractor operated whole cane cutter 
planter. The complete sugarcane which is fed by the labour sitting on the machine is 
cut automatically into pieces before dropping into the furrows. Fertilizers and chemicals 
are also applied simultaneously. The seed rate varies from 32 to 35 q per acre. The 
labour requirement is 33 man-h/2.5 acre. Length of setts varies from 23 to 42 cm. The 
speed of operation is 1.20 to 1.90 km per hr. The capacity of machine varies from 2-3 
acres per day. The machine can save about 25% cost of operation in comparison to 
traditional method. Use this machine on custom hiring basis.

70



Intercropping: Intercrop one row of the recommended varieties of summer moong 
or summer mash in between two rows of sugarcane to get an additional grain yield of 
1.5 to 2 quintals per acre of summer moong/summer mash. This does not affect the 
cane yield and improves the soil fertility. The details are as under:

Practice Summer moong Summer mash

Seed rate per acre 4 kg 5 kg

Time of sowing March 20 to April 10 March 15 to April 7
Mentha can also be grown as an intercrop. Plant one row of mentha between 

two rows of sugarcane. Mentha and sugarcane can be planted simultaneously in the 
first fortnight of February. Use one quintal of mentha suckers per acre. In addition to 
fertilizers recommended for sugarcane, apply 18 kg N (39 kg Urea) and 10 kg P2O5 (62 
kg Super Phosphate) per acre. Half N and full phosphorus may be applied at planting 
and remaining half N about 40 days after planting. Take only one cutting of Mentha. 

Okra can also be grown as an intercrop. Intercrop two rows of okra 45 cm apart 
in between the two rows of sugarcane planted either at 90:30 or 120:30 cm paired 
row planting systems  in the second fortnight of February month. Use  11 kg seed  of 
okra per acre for 90:30 cm planting system and 9 kg for 120:30 cm.  Fertilizers to the 
intercrop should be applied as recommended for sole crop of okra. Terminate the  okra 
crop in the second fortnight of June to avoid the intercrop competition.

One row of cucumber can be sown within the two rows of sugarcane as intercrop 
in paired row trench planted sugarcane either at 90:30 cm or 120:30 cm. The cucumber 
seeds should be sown by keeping plant to plant distance of 45 cm by using 1 kg seed 
per acre in the second fortnight of February. Use 40 kg nitrogen (90 kg urea), 20 kg 
phosphorus (125 kg superphosphate) and 20 kg potash (35 kg murate of potash) to 
cucumber crop in addition to fertilization to sugarcane crop.
Fertilizer Application 

Organic and Bio-fertilizers: Apply 8 tonnes of FYM/press-mud per acre 15 days 
before planting and mix into the soil with a plough or tiller. In case of trench planting, 
apply press-mud at the base of the trench and mix it into soil with a kasola. In case FYM/
press-mud is applied, use 40 (90 kg urea) kg N per acre. However, on coarse textured 
soils if FYM is applied along with recommended dose of nitrogen, approximately 10% 
higher yields can be obtained. On sandy soils, nitrogenous fertilizer may be applied 
after irrigation in moist soil and the number of splits may be increased. Application 
of Azotobacter/Consortium bio-fertilizer @ 4 kg per acre in the furrows at the time of 
planting would be helpful in increasing the cane yield. If FYM is in limited quantity, 
apply 4 kg consortium bio-fertilizer with 4 tonnes FYM per acre to plant as well as 
ratoon sugarcane crop. This bio-fertilizer is available at the PAU Seed Shop at Gate 
No. 1, Krishi Vigyan Kendras and Farm Advisory Service Centres in different districts.

Chemical Fertilizers: Apply fertilizers on soil test basis (See Chapter on ‘Soil 
Testing’). In the absence of a soil test, apply the following quantity of fertilizers on 
medium fertility soils:

71



Crop Nutrients (kg per acre) Fertilizers (kg per acre)
N P2O5 Urea Single Superphosphate

Plant crop 60 130
# #

Ratoon crop 90 195

#	 If the soil is low in available phosphorus, apply 12 kg P2O5 (75 kg single super phosphate) per 
acre at sowing.  

•	 In soils testing low in available potassium, application of 50 kg per acre murate of 
potash to planted sugarcane in furrows at the time of planting and with first hoeing/
earthing in ratoon crop improves yield and quality.

•	 Apply only 100 kg urea per acre if, sugarcane is grown after potato crop. 
Method of Fertilizer Application 

(i) Plant Crop: Apply one half dose of nitrogen as top dressed/drilled alongside 
the cane rows with first irrigation after germination. Top dress or drill the remaining 
half dose of nitrogen along side the cane rows in May or June. Apply full dose of 
phosphorus (based on soil test) in furrows below the cane setts at the time of planting.

(ii) Ratoon Crop:Top-dress one third of nitrogen in February with first hoeing, one-
third in April and the remaining one-third in May. Phosphorus (on soil-test basis) should 
be drilled along the cane rows at the time of first cultivation in February.

(iii) Rainfed Crop: If the moisture in the soil is optimum, apply one half of the 
dose of nitrogen at planting. In case the moisture is deficient, the whole dose should 
be applied with the onset of rains.

Iron deficiency: Iron deficiency has been observed both in the ratoon and plant 
crops on light-textured and calcareous soils. Deficiency symptoms first appear in 
young leaves as yellow stripes between the green veins. Later, the veins also turn 
yellow. In severe cases, leaves become white and the plants remain stunted. Spray 
the crop 2 or 3 times with 1% solution of ferrous sulphate (1 kg ferrous sulphate in 
100 litres of water) at weekly intervals soon after the symptoms appear.
Weed Control 

Cultural Control: Two or three hoeings can be done with a triphali or tractor mounted 
tiller or tractor operated rotary weeder.The spreading of trash-blanket between the cane 
rows after the emergence of the shoots helps to suppress weeds. This practice has the 
added advantage of conserving soil moisture, particularly in rainfed areas.

Chemical Control: Pre-emergence application of 800 g per acre Atrataf/Solaro/
Masstaf/Markazine 50 WP (atrazine) or Sencor 70 WP (metribuzin) or Karmex/Klass 
80 WP (diuron) or 1000 g per acre Authority NXT 58 WP (sulfentrazone+clomazone) in 
200 litres of water within 2-3 days of planting effectively controls the broadleaf weeds 
and annual grasses. For control of hardy weed like Bans Patta, use only Sencor 70 WP 
or Karmex/Klass 80 WP. 

72



Alternatively, post-emergence application of 1200 g per acre Triskele/Trishuk (2,4-
D sodium salt 44% + metribuzin 35% + pyrazosulfuron ethyl 1.0%)  WDG or 1000 
g per acre Sindica (2,4- D sodium salt 48% + metribuzin 32% + chlorimuron ethyl 
0.8%) WDG in 200 litres of water at 3-5 leaf stage of weeds provides effective control 
of seasonal grass, sedge and broad leaf weeds. For fields infested with dila, post-
emergence application of 800 g per acre 2, 4-D  sodium salt 80 WP in 200 litres of water 
is recommended. In fields infested with Ipomoea spp. (lapeta vel) and other broadleaf 
weeds, apply 800 g of 2,4-D sodium salt 80 WP or 400 mL  per acre 2,4-D amine salt 
58 SL by dissolving in 200 litres of water when these weeds are at 3 to 5 leaf stage.

Straw Mulching: After complete germination by mid-April, uniformly spread paddy 
straw or rice husk or sugarcane trash or tree leaves at the rate of 20-25 quintals per 
acre between the rows. Mulching reduces soil temperature and conserves soil moisture. 
It also suppresses weeds and reduces the incidence of shoot-borer. Straw-mulching 
increases the yield of sugarcane both under rainfed and irrigated conditions.

Irrigation and Drainage: Hot and dry period during April to June is the most critical 
period for the growth of sugarcane. During this period, irrigate the crop at 7 to 12 
days interval. During the rainy-season, adjust the frequency of irrigation according to 
rainfall. Drain away excess water from the sugarcane fields, if these get flooded during 
the rainy season. During winters (November to January), irrigate the crop at monthly 
intervals. To save the crop from frost, apply one irrigation around mid-December and 
another in the first week of January.

Sub Surface Drip Fertigation: Paired row (30:120 cm) planted sugarcane should 
be drip irrigated every third day with a lateral pipe placed 20 cm deep and 150 cm apart 
having dripper spacing 30 cm. Drip irrigation with dripper discharge of 2.2 litre per hour 
should be given as per the following schedule:

Month Time of irrigation (Minutes)*
April-June 120

July-Aug 100

Sept-Oct 80

Nov-Dec 60

If discharge rate is different, then time of irrigation may be adjusted proportionally 
by the formula:-
Adjusted time (min) = (2.2 × Time of irrigation (min)*) ÷ Discharge of dripper (Litre/hour)

Start fertigation of 104 kg urea per acre for plant crop and 156 kg urea per acre for 
ratoon crop in the month of April and complete in 90-100 days in 10 equal splits.	

Prevention of Lodging: To prevent the crop from lodging, adopt the following measures:
•	 Earth up heavily the flat-planted as well as the trench-planted crop at the end of 

June, before the onset of the monsoon. Trench-planting is particularly effective 
in preventing lodging. 

73



•	 Prop up the crop in the end of August or in the beginning of September by using 
the trash-twist method which consists of the tying of a single cane row instead of  
tying two rows together. Twist the leaves and the trash to make a rope and pass it 
alternately along the cane clumps in the row. This method does not hinder the growth 
and photosynthesis of the plants as in the case when two cane rows are tied together.
Protection from frost: Protect the crop from frost as under:

•	 Grow frost-resistant varieties viz. CoPb 95, CoPb 96, CoPb 98, CoPb 92, Co 118, 
CoJ 85, CoJ 64, CoPb 93, CoPb 94, CoPb 91, Co 238 and CoJ 88. 

•	 Raise a bumper crop with adequate fertilization, irrigation and plant protection 
measures, because a poor and stunted crop suffers more from frost. 

•	 Prevent lodging. A lodged crop is more damaged by frost. 
•	 Irrigate the crop, as adequate soil-moisture during the frosty period keeps the soil 

comparatively warm and saves it from frost. Irrigate the harvested fields if meant 
to be ratooned. Plough the patch of land between the cane rows. 

•	 In frosty areas, plant setts only from the top portion of the cane, as these buds are 
less damaged by frost. The top portion can be buried in the soil during the frosty 
spell and taken out in the spring for planting. 

Autumn Sugarcane
Sugarcane can also be grown successfully as an autumn crop with various 

intercrops. Growing intercrops in autumn cane will enhance the total productivity/net 
profit per unit area per unit time. Recommendations concerning intercrops are given 
in Table 1.
Rotations 

Kharif fodder/Green manure/Maize/Rice (short duration)/Moong-Sugarcane with 
intercrop (as in Table) ratoon I-ratoon II-Wheat.
Improved Varieties: Plant CoPb 95, CoPb 96, Co 15023, CoPb 92, Co118, CoJ 85 
and CoJ 64
Agronomic Practices

Time of Planting: 20 September to 20 October. The planting should not be delayed 
further.

Seed Rate: Plant 20 thousand of three budded or 15 thousand of four budded or 
12 thousand of five budded setts per acre. The seed for autumn planting should be 
obtained from a well grown spring or autumn crop.

Spacing and Method of Planting: Flat planting in rows 90 cm apart. Adopt paired 
row trench planting method as described under spring planting.

Intercropping: For higher returns per unit area, adopt intercropping in autumn 
sugarcane as given in Table 1.

Fertilizer Application: Apply fertilizers on soil test basis (See Chapter on ‘Soil 
Testing’). In the absence of a soil test, apply the following quantity of fertilizers on 
medium fertility soils:

74



75

Table 1: Intercrops in autumn sugarcane

Name of of Variety Sowing/ Seed No. of Spacing Fertilizers recommended Harvest- Remarks
Intercrop planting rate intercrop between per acre ing time

time (kg per rows the rows of 
acre) intercrop

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Wheat Recommend- Last week 16 2 20 cm 25 kg N (54 kg urea) 12 Mid- ---

ed of kg P2O5 (75 kg single April
varieties Oct. to superphosphate, SSP) 12 

15th Nov. kg K2O (20 kg muriate of 
Potash, MOP)

Raya Recommend- Whole 0.40 1  - For sugarcane planted at April Preferably, intercrop 
(Brassica ed Oct. (in paired 90:30 cm should be sown 
juncea) varieties row 20 kg N (44 kg urea) after first irrigation to 

trenches 8 kg P2O5 (50 kg SSP) sugarcane. 
Gobhi Sar- Recommend- October at 90:30 For sugarcane planted at  
son ed varieties, 10 to 31 or 120 120:30cm 
(B. napus) including :30cm) 16 kg N (36 kg urea)

Canola 4.8 kg P2O5 (30 kg SSP)

African PC 6 Mid Oct. 
Sarson (B to mid 
tournefortii) Nov. 

Toria (B Recommend- 20-30 1 2 30 cm 15 kg N (33 kg urea) 5 kg End Dec. Wheat can also be 
campestris) ed varieties Sept. P2O5 (32 kg single super sown after harvesting 
var. Toria phosphate) toria.

Gram Recommend- 25th Oct. 12 2 30 cm 6 kg N (13 kg urea) + 8 kg April ---
ed varieties for to 10th P2O5   (50 kg SSP)
different zones Nov.



76

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

Potato Chandermukhi 20 Sept. to 800 1 - 36 kg N (78 kg urea) 16 kg End Wheat  can also be taken 
or any other 15th Oct. P2O5 (100 kg SSP) 35 kg of after harvesting potato crop 
short duration K2O (60 kg MOP) Dec. in end-December.
variety

Cabbage Recommended Last week of -- 1 -- 25 kg N (54 kg urea) 12.5 Jan Transplant 4 to 5 weeks,  
varieties Oct. to Nov. kg P2O5  (78 kg SSP) 12.5 & old seedling from end of 

kg K2O (20 kg MOP) Feb October to November

Radish Recommended October 4-5 2 30cm 25 kg N (54 kg urea) 12 Jan- ---
varieties Kg P2O5 (75 kg SSP) uary

Peas Recommended October 22 2 30 cm 14 kg N (31 kg urea) 16 kg --- ---
Varieties P2O5  (100 kg SSP)

Tomato Recommended Nursery: 0.05 1 At 12.5 kg N (28 kg urea) End Protect intercrop from low 
Varieties Oct -Nov (nurs- (in paired centre 12.5 kg P2O5 (78 kg SSP), Mar temperature injury from end 

Transplant- ery) row between 12.5 kg K2O (21 Kg MOP) to Dec-end Feb 
ing: Nov-Dec trenches at two mid 

120:30cm) cane May
rows

Garlic PG-17 4th week of 112 to 3 15cm 10 ton FYM, 25 kg N (54 April In paired row trench planted 
PG-18 Sept. to first 125 kg urea), 12 kg P2O5 (75 sugarcane, use 85 to 95 kg 

week of Oct. kg kg SSP) garlic seed



77

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

Onion Recommended Nursery: Mid 2.0 to 5 15 cm 21 kg N (45 kg urea) Mid Number of  intercrops 
Varieties Oct- mid Nov  2.5 (in paired 10 kg P2O5 (62.5 kg SSP), May rows can be adjusted with 

Transplant- (nurs- row 10 kg K2O (17 Kg MOP) sugarcane row spacing
ing: Jan. ery) trenches at 

120:30cm)

Capsicum Recommended Nursery: Mid 0.08 1 - 28 kg N (62 kg urea) Mid  Capsicum crop should 
varieties Oct. (in paired 11.2 kg P2O5 (70 kg SSP; Mar. be protected from low 

row 4.8 kg K2O (8 kg MOP) to temperature injury from 
trenches at end end December  to end 
120:30cm) May February

Broccoli/ Recommended Nursery: Mid 0.150 2 45 cm For 90:30 cm system: Mid 
Cauliflower varieties September (for (Sug- apply 37.5 kg N (82 kg De-

Transplant- nurs- arcane urea), cem-
ing: Mid ery) planted in 18.75 kg P2O5 (116 kg ber 
October to paired row SSP),
first week of trenches 18.75 kg K2O (30 Kg 
November either at MOP) 

90:30 For 120:30 system: apply 
cm or 30 kg N (65 kg urea),

120:30cm) 15 kg P2O5 (94 kg SSP),
15 kg K2O (25 Kg MOP)



Nutrients (kg/acre) Fertilizers (kg/acre)
N P2O5 Urea Single Superphosphate

90 # 195 #

# 	 If the soil test is low in phosphorus, apply 12 kg P2O5 (75 kg single super phosphate) per acre at 
sowing.

•	 In soils testing low in available potassium, application of 50 kg per acre murate of 
potash to planted sugarcane in furrows at the time of planting and with first hoeing/
earthing in ratoon crop improves yield and quality. 
Apply urea in three equal doses, 1/3 dose of N should be applied at planting, 

1/3 at the end of March and the remaining 1/3 by the end of April. The fertilizer 
recommendations for intercrops are given in Table 1.

Weed Control: For control of gulli danda in wheat intercropped in autumn 
sugarcane, spray 400 mL Axial 5 EC (pinoxaden*) or 13 g per acre Leader/SF-10/
Safal/ Marksulfo 75 WG (sulfosulfuron*) using 150 litres of water at 30–35 days after 
sowing of wheat. A post- emergence application of 500 g per acre Isoproturon 75 WP 
at 30–40 days after sowing of wheat is recommended for controlling weeds in fields 
where gulli danda has not developed any resistance. 

For controlling broadleaf weeds, use 10 g per acre Algrip/ Algrip Royal/Markgrip/
Makoto 20 WP (metsulfuron*) in 150 litres of water at 30-35 days after sowing. If there 
is infestation of button booti, spray 20 g per acre Aim/ Affinity 40 DF (carfentrazone 
ethyl*) in 200 litres of water at 25-30 days after sowing. 

For control of mixed infestation of grass (gulli danda and wild oats) and broadleaf 
weeds, spray 16 g Total/Markpower 75 WG (sulfosulfuron + metsulfuron*) or 160 g 
per acre Atlantis 3.6 WDG (mesosulfuron + iodosulfuron) using 150 litres of water per 
acre at 30–35 days after sowing wheat.

Irrigation: Apply first irrigation one month after planting, followed by three 
irrigations upto February and subsequent irrigations as per the recommendations for 
the spring crop.
Other recommendations are the same as •	 Harvest the crop during last 
for the spring crop. week of January to obtain 
Ratoon Management: Improve the yield of good ratoon crop.
the ratoon crop as under: •	 During 1st week of March fill 
•	 Do not harvest the crop to be ratooned before the gap of ratoon crop with 

the end of January. If the crop is harvested planting of 3 budded setts.
earlier, there will be poor sprouting of the 
stubbles due to low temperature during December and January. 

•	 Soon after the harvesting of early varieties in November or December, remove the 
trash and irrigate the field. When the soil attains the optimum moisture conditions, 
loosen it by hoeing, ploughing or interculture. Do not cover the stubble with cane trash. 

•	 Harvest the canes as close to the ground as possible to promote better sprouting. 
If still some big stubbles are left, shave or lop them off close to the ground. Also 

78



remove late tillers or water-shoots, as they inhibit full sprouting of the stubbles. 
•	 Plough the harvested field twice with a tractor-drawn tiller to check weeds or adopt 

chemical weed-control measures. 
•	 The stand of the ratoon crop can be improved by planting the gaps with three 

budded setts in the beginning of March. 
•	 Nitrogen requirement of the ratoon crop is one and a half-times than that of the 

plant crop. Apply 90 kg N (195 kg urea) per acre to the ratoon crop in three split 
doses one-third in February-March, one-third in April and the remaining one-third 
in the beginning of June. Drill phosphorus along the cane rows in March on the 
basis of a soil test. 

•	 Shoot-borer, top-borer and black bug appear in the ratoon crop. Control them as 
soon as noticed. 

Gur (Jaggery) Making 
Gur is a natural sweetener rich in minerals like calcium, iron, phosphorus etc. 

The best quality gur and shakkar (powdered jaggery) are obtained from CoPb 92, 
Co 118, CoJ 64 and CoJ 88. Making of gur and shakkar from sugarcane involves 
juice extraction, clarification, boiling and concentration, cooling and moulding. Use an 
efficient cane-crusher for extracting juice.

For clarifying the juice, add Sukhlai emulsion. Sukhlai is a shrub which grows in 
the Shivalik Hills and is available at Hoshiarpur. For preparing emulsion, soak the dry 
bark of Sukhlai in a bucket of water for 24 hours. Then rub the bark to obtain a thick 
mucilaginous fluid. Add about one litre of this fluid to 100 litres of cane juice, when the 
scum begins to rise in the pan. Towards the end of boiling process, heating is regulated 
to avoid charring. The concentrated juice is transferred to the cooling pan when its 
temperature reaches the striking point (114-116oC) for gur making and (120-122ºC) for 
shakkar making. Gur is then moulded into desired shapes and sizes using moulding 
frames designed by Department of Food Science and Technology, PAU Ludhiana. 
For shakkar, at the time of solidification the material is made into powder manually 
using wooden scrappers. Powder is dried to 10.5-11.5 % moisture content, sieved and 
packed in polythene bags.
Crushing schedule of sugarcane varieties for sugar mills of Punjab 
(Developed in consultation with Sugarfed, Punjab)
Varieties* Crop Months
CoPb 92, CoPb 96, Co 15023, Co 238, Co 118, CoPb 
95, CoJ 85 and CoJ 64 Ratoon (A &S) November and December
CoPb 93, CoPb 98, Co 238, CoPb 91, CoJ 88 and 
CoPb 94 Ratoon (S) December and January
CoPb 92, CoPb 96, Co 15023, Co 238, Co 118, CoPb 
95, CoJ 85 and CoJ 64 Plant (A) December and January

CoPb 92, CoPb 96, Co 15023, Co 238, Co 118, CoPb 
95, CoJ 85 and CoJ 64 Plant (S) January and February

CoPb 98, CoPb 93, CoPb 91, CoPb 94 and CoJ 88 Plant (S) February, March and 
April

79



* Varieties are written in the order of preference for crushing (A-Autumn; S-Spring)
Note: The above crushing schedule would give sugar recovery of 10.5 percent if varietal ratio is as 
given below:
•	 The area under early and mid-late varieties should be in ration of 3:2, respectively.
•	 Under early varieties Spring: Autumn should be 

planted in the ratio of 2:1, respectively. •	 Do early sowing to reduce 
•	 Proportion of Ratoon crop: Plant crop be maintained damage by early shoot borer.

as 1:1, respectively. •	 Use Tricho-cards for the 
Plant-Protection control of borers.
A. Insect-Pests •	 Do not plant sugarcane for 

Termite: The termite appears during April one year and three years for 
to June and again in October. It destroys the control of red rot and wilt, 
germinating buds and causes the drying up of respectively in diseased 
shoots after germination. To avoid its attack, apply fields.
only well-rotten farmyard manure and remove 
the stubbles and debris of previous crop from the 
field. For the control of termites, apply 200 mL  Coragen 18.5 SC (chlorantraniliprole*) 
using 400 litres of water over seed setts in furrows before covering them with soil or 
spray 45 mL  Imidagold 17.8 SL (imidacloprid) in 400 litres of water with sprinkler along 
the rows at post germination stage (about 45 days after planting). 

Early shoot-borer: This pest appears from April to June and causes dry dead-
hearts which can be easily pulled out. To control it:
•	 Plant the crop early, i.e. before the middle of March.
•	 Apply 10 kg granules of Regent/Mortel/Rippen 0.3 G (fipronil) before the setts are 

covered with soil by planking.  or
•	 Apply 10 kg Regent/ Mortel/Rippen 0.3 G (fipronil) mixed in 20 kg moist sand/

soil or  150 g Takumi 20 WG (flubendiamide) or 150 mL  Coragen/Citigen 18.5 SC 
(chlorantraniliprole*) or 2 litres of Durmet/Classic/Dursban/Markpyriphos 20 EC 
(chlorpyriphos) in 400 litres of water per acre along the rows at post-germination 
stage (about 45 days after planting). Earth up slightly followed by light irrigation.   

OR
Use Tricho-cards having 20,000 eggs of Corcyra cephalonica parasitized (seven 

days old) by Trichogramma chilonis per acre at 10 days interval from mid-April to end-
June. These eggs are fixed on cards of 10x15 cm size. Cut the cards into 40 pieces/
strips, each having approximately 500 parasitized eggs. Staple these pieces/strips on 
the lower surface of the leaves uniformly at 40 spots per acre during evening hours. 
Normally 8 releases are required. The tricho-cards should not be stapled during rainy 
days.

Use of 10 pheromone traps per acre from April to June along with Tricho-card 
application. Change the pheromone lure at one month interval.

Black bug: This pest is active during April to June. The attacked crop looks pale. 
The black adults and pink young nymphs suck the sap from the leaf-sheaths. Spray 

80



the crop with 350 mL  of Dursban/Lethal/Massban/Goldban 20 EC (chlorpyriphos) in 
400 litres of water per acre with manually operated sprayer. Direct the spray into the 
leaf-whorl.

Pyrilla: Pyrilla reduces cane yield and sugar recovery heavily. This pest appears 
in April-May and again in August-September. The leaves of the damaged crop turn 
yellow. Later due to the development of a fungus, the crop turns black and the tops 
become unfit for feeding to cattle. The incidence of this pest is particularly high in a 
luxuriant crop and in the interior of field. When the attack is severe it becomes difficult 
to make gur. Spray the crop with 600 mL  Dursban 20 EC (chlorpyriphos) in 400 litres 
of water per acre with manually operated sprayer. 

Top-borer: This pest appears from March to October and causes severe damage 
during July-August. The typical symptoms are the shot-holes in the leaf, white or red 
streaks on the upper side of the leaf midrib and bunchy tops from July onwards. The 
central leaf of the cane top dries up and turns dark. To control it: 
•	 Collect and destroy the moths and egg-clusters. 
•	 Cut the attacked shoots at the ground level from April to June. 
•	 Use Tricho-cards having 20,000 eggs of Corcyra cephalonica parasitized (seven 

days old) by Tricogramma japonicum per acre at 10 days old interval from mid-
April to end-June. The method to use these cards is given under early shoot borer.

•	 Use of 10 pheromone traps per acre from May to August along with recommended 
Tricho-card application. Change the pheromone lure at one month interval.

•	 Apply 10 kg granules of Ferterra 0.4 GR or 12 kg Furadan/Diafuran/Furacarb/ 
Carbocil/Fury encapsulated 3G (carbofuran) at the base of the shoots or spray 
150 mL  Coragen 18.5 SC (chlorantraniliprole) in 400 liters of water per acre, in the 
last week of June or in the first week of July only if the top borer damage exceeds 
5% level. Earth up slightly to prevent the granules from flowing with the irrigation 
water and irrigate the crop immediately. This operation will control the third brood 
of the top-borer which does the maximum damage. Take the following precautions 
in using carbofuran:

•	 Use rubber gloves while applying carbofuran granules. Never handle these 
granules with bare hands. A mask should be used to cover the face.

•	 Mix it with the moist soil to reduce the chances of its falling into the eyes of the 
person applying it. 

•	 The person applying these granules should not eat or drink anything without 
washing his hands thoroughly with soap. 

•	 Carbofuran treated sugarcane leaves and weeds should not be fed to cattle 
for about one month after the treatment.
Stalk borer or Tarai borer: This pest is active throughout the year. The larvae 

overwinter in the stubble and water-shoots. The attack remains low during April-June 
and increases in July. Its incidence is highest during October-November. There are no 
outward symptoms of the attack of this pest. Entrance or exit holes on the attacked 
canes can be seen only after stripping. A larva sometimes damages upto 3 nodes and 

81



the cane may be attacked at several places. The cane yield and sugar recovery are 
adversely affected in the case of serious attack. The control measures against the pest 
are as under:
•	 Do not use the cane-seed from the infested field. 
•	 Use tricho-cards having 20,000 eggs of Corcyra cephalonica parasitized by 

Trichogramma chilonis, 10-12 times at 10 days interval from July to October. 
Cut one tricho-card of size 10 x 15 cm into 40 small strips (5 x 0.75 cm), each 
having approximately 500 parasitized eggs. Staple these strips on the underside 
of leaves uniformly at 40 spots per acre during evening hours. These tricho-cards 
are available at the Biocontrol Labs, Department of Entomology, PAU Ludhiana 
and Regional Station, Gurdaspur.

•	 Use of 10 pheromone traps per acre from July to October along with recommended 
Tricho-card application. Change the pheromone lure at one month interval.

•	 At harvest, do not leave the water-shoots in the field. 
•	 Do not ratoon a heavily infested crop. Plough the affected fields, collect and destroy 

the stumps.
Whitefly: The damaged crop looks pale during August-October. The underside of 

the leaves is full of nymphs and pupae which suck the sap from the leaves. The leaves 
turn black due to the development of a fungus.  

Sugarcane thrips: The thrips damage the crop from April to June. This pest 
suck the sap from the partly opened leaf and tips of the younger leaves, resulting in 
withering and drying of leaftip, which get rolled inwardly. The thrips prefer plant crop 
than ratoon crop.

Sugarcane mite: The mite appears from April to June and feeds on the lower side 
of the leaves under a fine web. The leaves turn red and later appear to be burnt. The 
growth of the affected crop is retarded during the pre-monsoon period. Baru (Sorghum 
halepense) is the alternative host plant from which this mite spreads to the sugarcane 
crop. So destroy the weed, if growing near the sugarcane fields.

Gurdaspur borer: This borer appears from June to October and causes the 
withering of the central leaves (notably the 5th leaf) followed by the total drying up of the 
tops. The affected canes break at the point of attack with a slight jerk. Rogue out canes 
showing withered tops in the afternoon every week from June to September. The tops 
should be cut off well below the point of attack. The timely rogueing of affected plants 
is very important for controlling the pest. Bury the rogued-out plants. Do not ratoon 
a heavily affected crop. Plough up the fields not meant for ratooning and destroy the 
stubbles before June. 
B. Diseases

Red rot: Red rot is caused by the fungus Colletotrichum falcatum. The disease 
appears from July till the crop is harvested. The third or fourth leaf of cane from top 
shows yellowing at first, while rest of the leaves also loose colour afterwards and dry 
up. Later, the whole clump dries up. On splitting open the cane, the tissue is found to 
be reddened but the discoloration is not uniform and is interspersed with white patches 

82



running across the width of the split cane. The pith of affected cane emits alcoholic 
smell. The control measures against this disease are as under:
•	 Use seed from absolutely disease free seed plot. 
•	 Do not plant sugarcane in the disease affected fields for one year. 
•	 Grow varieties fairly resistant to red rot. 
•	 Crush the affected crop early and plough up the fields soon after harvesting the 

crop. Collect and burn the stubbles. 
•	 Rogue out and bury the diseased canes. Uproot the entire clumps and not merely 

the affected stalks. 
•	 Do not ratoon the diseased crop. 

Wilt: This disease is caused by Cephalosporium sacchari or Fusarium moniliforme. 
It appears from July till the crop is harvested. The leaves of the affected cane at first 
turn yellow and finally the top dries up. On splitting open a diseased cane, the pith 
shows a dirty red discoloration near the nodes. The discoloration is invariably darker 
than that in the remaining portion of the internodes. The affected stalks become light 
and hollow. The control measures against this disease are the same as those for red 
rot. As the causal fungus persists in the soil over long period, the affected field should 
not be cultivated with  sugarcane for 3 years.

Smut: Smut is caused by Ustilago scitaminea. This disease is prevalent throughout 
the year but is severe from May to July and again in October-November. Its incidence 
increases in the ratoon crop. It is easily recognised by the appearance of long whip-
like shoots covered with dusty black mass of spores. These whips may arise from the 
top of the canes as well as from the lateral sprouted buds. Adopt the following control 
measures:
•	 Use only smut free canes for seed. Reject even the healthy looking canes in the 

diseased stools or those growing in the vicinity of the smut infected clumps. 
•	 Remove the smut whips gently (without shaking) after putting them inside a closely 

woven drill bag. Then uproot the entire diseased clumps and bury them deep. 
Immerse the bag used for collecting the smut whips in boiling water for 5 minutes 
after every roguing of the crop. 

•	 Do not ratoon the smut infected crop. 
Ratoon Stunting: A coryniform bacterium (Clavibacter xyli) has been found to be 

associated with the disease. The affected crop remains stunted with thin canes. The 
leaves are comparatively pale and the roots are poorly developed. The disease can be 
identified by slicing mature canes longitudinally a little below the rind with a sharp knife. 
In the lower part of the node, parallel to the zone of the whitish waxy band, the pith 
shows discolored dots, commas and straight or bent streaks upto 2 to 3 mm in length. 
They may be yellow, orange, pink, red or reddish brown. Do not use the diseased crop 
for planting. Select the cane-seed from a vigorously growing and healthy crop. The moist 
hot air treatment of seed canes at 54oC for 4 hours is effective in destroying the causal 
organism. Do not ratoon the diseased crop.

83



Grassy Shoot Disease: The disease is caused by mycoplasma like bodies. The 
affected plants give rise to numerous thin tillers. The leaves become reduced in size, 
thin, narrow and usually turn chlorotic. If the attack is light, one or two weak canes may 
be formed. Uproot and destroy the affected clumps immediately after appearance. The 
moist hot air treatment of the seed-canes at 54ºC for 4 hours inactivates the causal 
organisms of this disease. Its incidence increases in the ratoon crop, therefore, do not 
ratoon the diseased crop.

Red Stripe: Red stripe is a bacterial disease caused by Pseudomonas rubrilineans. 
It appears during June-August. The affected leaves show bright red streaks which are 
long, narrow and run longitudinally on the leaf-blade, causing the rotting of tops in severe 
cases. Rogue out the affected canes and burn or bury them.

Top Rot (Pokkah boeng): This disease is caused by Fusarium moniliforme. It 
appears during the rainy season from July–September. The young leaves in the top 
portion of the plant become chlorotic at the base and get distorted and shortened. They 
turn dark red and fall off gradually. In severe cases, the rotting of the top portion of the 
cane occurs. Remove the affected clumps and bury them.

Leaf Scald: The disease is caused by the bacterium Xanthomonas albilineans. 
Whitish or cream coloured one or two narrow stripes are observed on the leaf extending 
sometimes down to leaf sheath. The affected plants produce side-shoots starting first 
from lower nodes with similar stripes on young leaves. The stripes become reddish 
and later the leaves start withering from top downwards giving scalded appearance. 
On splitting open the affected canes, reddish brown vascular streaks are observed in 
the internodes. Sometimes affected plants suddenly wilt and die without any obvious 
internal symptoms. As the disease is sett-borne, healthy and disease free seed should 
be planted. Treatment of seed-cane with moist hot air at 54ºC for 4 hours inactivates the 
bacterium. Sterilization of cutting knives by flaming or by dipping in 2% Lysol solution 
during seed preparation should be practised to minimise spread of the disease. Rogue 
out the diseased clumps.
C. Rodents 

Being a long duration crop, sugarcane provides shelter to rodents and suffers heavy 
damage. The rat, Bendicota bengalensis, which digs extensive burrows with characteristic 
soil heaps, is often abundant in sugarcane. A lodged crop gets highly damaged. For 
effective rodent control in sugarcane, see Chapter ‘Management of Rodents and Birds’.
Management of Seed Crop 

To obtain disease-free seed, a separate seed nursery should be maintained. Do 
not use the commercial crop for seed, as many pests and diseases go unnoticed in 
such a crop. Alternatively, tissue culture raised plants can also be used to raise a 
healthy seed crop. The plants should be spaced 60 cm apart with a row to row spacing 
of 90 cm, followed by immediate irrigation. The crop thus raised, should be used for 
raising a subsequent seed crop by planting three budded setts, following conventional 
practices. For seed production, the following package of practices are recommended:
•	 Plant the crop in the last week of March. 

84



•	 Obtain the seed stalks propagated from moist hot-air-treated seed. The treated 
seed is planted at the Research Stations and is further propagated at the sugar 
factory farms and the farms of selected cane growers. This seed is supplied to the 
growers to raise the seed-crop. 

•	 Give a fertilizer dose of 90 kg of N (195 kg urea) per acre. Apply nitrogen in 3 equal 
doses i.e. at planting, in May and in mid-July. High dose of nitrogen will result in 
good quality of immature seed cane. 

•	 Follow plant protection schedule strictly, to keep the crop free from insect pests 
and diseases. 

•	 Frost injury results in low germination of sugarcane. Therefore, protect the seed 
crop against frost by irrigating it frequently during December and January.  

85



SUGARBEET

Sugarbeet is the second largest sugar crop in the world, after sugarcane. It is a 
short duration (6-7 months) sugar crop. Before cultivation of sugarbeet, the farmers 
should ensure marketing of the produce by contacting sugarmill or other stake 
holders, before hand.

Soil Type: Sugarbeet can be grown successfully on well-drained soils, loamy sand 
to clay loam,saline and alkali soils, though it prefers sandy loam soils. 

Crop rotations: Rice/Basmati-sugarbeet; Kharif fodder- sugar beet
Varieties: The tropical sugarbeet hybrids have the potential to give average root 

yield of 240-320 q per acre with 13-15% sucrose under Punjab conditions.
Land Preparation: The field can be prepared by 2-3 ploughings followed by 

planking.
Time of Sowing: Whole of October to mid-November is optimum time of sowing. 
Seed Rate and Method of Sowing: The crop can be sown on flat beds or on ridges 

spaced at 50 cm and plant to plant spacing of 20cm. The optimum plant population is 
40,000 plants per acre. The seed is sown by dibbling at 2.5 cm soil depth. Maintain 
only one plant per hill.

Fertilizer Application: Apply 8 t per acre well rotten FYM and mix it well before 
sowing. In the absence of FYM, apply 60 kg N (135 kg urea) ad 12 kg P2O5 (75 kg SSP) 
per acre. Apply 45 kg urea and full phosphorous at the time of sowing and remaining 
urea in two splits of 45 kg each at 30 and 60 days after sowing. If FYM has been used 
reduce the nitrogen dose to 48 kg (105 kg urea) per acre. In potassium deficient soils, 
apply 12 kg K2O (20 kg muriate of potash) per acre at sowing.   In boron deficient 
(below 0.5 kg B per acre) soils, apply 400 g B (4 kg borax) per acre at sowing.

Weed Control: The crop requires 2 to 3 hand weedings at monthly interval.
Irrigation: Sugarbeet is very sensitive to water stagnation at all stages of growth.  

Apply first irrigation immediately after sowing and subsequent irrigation about two 
weeks after sowing. The crop needs irrigation at 3 to 4 weeks up to February-end, 
and at intervals of 10 to 15 days during March-April. Stop irrigation 2 weeks before 
harvesting.

Harvesting: The crop can be harvested from mid-April to May-end. The harvesting 
can be done with sugarbeet harvestor/potato digger/cultivator/by manual digging. The 
beet roots must be processed within 48 hrs after harvesting. The beet leaves should 
be allowed to remain in the field to serve as green manure or alternately, the leaves 
can be fed to cattle as forage.

Plant Protection Measures
Sclerotiania root rot, Cercospora leaf spot and Heart rot are important diseases 

of sugar beet. Army worm, Tobacco caterpillar and Cut worm are troublesome insect 
pests. Sugar beet must be grown in the same field only once in three years to prevent 
pests and diseases. 

86



5. MEDICINAL, SPICE AND
AROMATIC CROPS

MENTHA

There are four species; Mentha arvensis, Mentha piperita, Mentha spicata and 
Mentha citrata, which can be grown commercially in the Punjab State. In 2023-24, 
area under this crop in the state was 13,652 hectares. Mentha oil obtained by distilling 
the green herb is used in pharmaceutical, flavour, cosmetic and perfume industries.

Climatic Requirements : Mentha  can  be grown  all  over  the  Punjab, wherever 
assured irrigation is available. It needs a well distributed rainfall of 200-250 mm and 
bright sunshine for good growth.

Soil Type: Well-drained, sandy loam to loamy soil with moderate to high organic 
matter, is best for this crop. The soil should be free from acidity, salinity, alkalinity and 
water-logging.

Rotations: Mentha-Potato, Mentha–Toria, Mentha–Oats (fodder), Mentha-
Basmati, Mentha–Wheat–Maize–Potato, Mentha-Maize-Potato, Mentha-DSR-Potato, 
Mentha-DSBR-Potato
Improved Varieties

CIM Unnati (2025): It is high yielding variety of menthol mint (Mentha arvensis 
L.) with high oil content (0.81-0.83 %) in herb and suitable for planting from end of 
January to mid of February. Its average herb yield is 113 quintals per acre. It produces 
the highest herb and oil yield when harvested 145 day after planting.

CIM Kranti (2020): It is high yielding variety of menthol mint (Mentha arvensis L.) 
and suitable for planting from end of January to mid of February. Its oil content in herb 
is 0.6-0.7% and on an average produces 110 quintals per acre herb yield. It gets ready 
for harvesting 140-150 days after planting. 

Kosi (2014): It is a high yielding variety of menthol mint (Mentha arvensis L.). On 
an average it gives 100-125 quintals per acre herb yield with oil content of 0.6 - 0.7%. 
It gives the highest herb and oil yield when harvested at 150 days after planting. 

Punjab Spearmint 1: The stem is purple-green, branched, erect and hairy. Leaves 
are simple, opposite, oblong-ovate and dented. The flowers are purplish-white and 
arranged in long terminal spikes. Its plants are vigorous and on an average attain the 
height of 75 cm at flowering. The fresh herb contains 0.57% oil, rich in carvone.

Russian Mint: The stem is green, branched, erect, and hairy. The leaves are 
simple, opposite, ovate, serrate, hairy. The flowers are purplish, minute, borned in 
cyme. On an average its plants attain height of about 55 cm at flowering. Its fresh 
herb contains 0.57% oil with distinct woody flavour for which it is highly demanded by 
flavour industry.

87



Agronomic Practices
Land Preparation: Two or three ploughings 

followed by planking are necessary to get a fine •	 Use two quintals of disease 
seedbed. The field should be free from stubbles free sucker for planting an 
and weeds. acre.

Bio-fertilizers : Apply consortium bio- •	 Sow the crop during mid 
fertilizer @ 4 kg per acre as soil application before January to end January, 
planting along with recommended fertilizer. however Kosi, CIM Kranti and 

Seed Rate: Mentha is propagated through CIM Unnati  variety can be 
suckers. About 2 quintals of freshly dug 5-8 sown upto mid February.
cm long suckers are enough for one acre. This •	 For water saving and higher 
quantity can be had from half kanal (10 marla) of yield, sow the crop on beds/
mentha. ridges and apply paddy straw 

Method of Planting: The suckers are laid mulch @ 24 quintals per acre.
end to end, 4-5 cm deep in furrows, 45 cm apart •	 Grow mentha as an intercrop 
and are then covered with soil by planking lightly.  in sunflower/sugarcane or 
For higher biomass production and water saving, onion as an intercrop in 
planting should be done on 67.5 cm wide beds mentha for higher returns.
(two rows) or ridges should be made at 60 cm 
spacing after broadcasting the suckers. Apply 24 
quintal of paddy straw mulch per acre and apply a light irrigation after planting. Do not 
plant sprouted suckers, as most of such suckers die.

Time of Planting: The best planting time is the mid-January to the end of January,  
however, Kosi, CIM Kranti and CIM Unnati should be planted from end of January to 
mid of February. The crop can also be raised by transplanting in April.

Intercropping: Mentha can also be grown as intercrop. Plant one row of 
mentha between two rows   of   sugarcane. Mentha and sugarcane can be planted 
simultaneously in the first fortnight of February. Use one quintal of mentha suckers per 
acre. In addition to fertilizers recommended to sugarcane, apply 18 kg N (39 kg urea) 
and 10 kg P2O5 (62 kg super phosphate) per acre. Half N and full phosphorus may be 
applied at planting and remaining half N about 40 days after planting. Take only one 
cutting of mentha.

Mentha can be successfully intercropped with sunflower. Sow two rows of mentha 
in end January between two lines of sunflower grown at 120 cm x 15 cm in North-
South direction. Use 150 kg of mentha suckers per acre. In addition to fertilizers 
recommended to sunflower, apply 23 kg N (50 kg urea) and 12 kg P2O5 (75 kg single 
superphosphate) per acre. Full phosphorus and half nitrogen be applied at planting 
and remaining half nitrogen at 40 days after planting.

Onion can be grown as intercrop in mentha. Both mentha and onion should be 
planted simultaneously from the mid-January to end January. Plant one row of onion 
in between the two rows of mentha planted at 45 cm, keeping plant to plant spacing of 
onion at 7.5 cm. Apply 13 kg N (29 kg urea), 7 kg P2O5 (44 kg SSP) and 7 kg K2O (12 
kg MOP) per acre in addition to recommended fertilizer of mentha. Full phosphorus 

88



and potash and half nitrogen be applied at planting and the remaining half nitrogen 
about 40 days after planting.

Fertilizer Application: Mentha responds favourably to organic manuring. Apply 
10-15 tonnes of well-rotten farmyard manure per acre before planting. The following 
quantities of inorganic fertilizers are recommended:

Nutrients (kg/acre) Fertilizers (kg/acre)
N P2O5 Urea DAP* or   Single Super phosphate
60 16 130 35 100

*  When 35 kg DAP is used, apply 115 kg urea per acre.
Drill one-fourth of nitrogen and the full quantity of phosphorus at planting. Apply 

another one fourth of nitrogen about 40 days after planting. Add the remaining half 
dose of nitrogen in two equal splits after the first cutting of the crop. The first split may 
be applied immediately and the second split 40 days afterwards.

Irrigation: Mentha requires frequent but light irrigations. Irrigate at 10 days interval 
till the end of March and at five or six days interval till the onset of the monsoon. During 
the rainy season, irrigate according to the need.

Drip Irrigation and Fertigation: Menthol mint should be drip irrigated at 3 days 
interval with a lateral pipe having dripper  discharge of 2.2 litre per hour and dripper 
placed at 30 cm apart as per following schedule:

Month Time of irrigation (Minutes)*
March 40
April 65
May 70
June 75

*If discharge rate is different, then time of irrigation may be adjusted proportionately 
by the formula:-
Adjusted time (min) = (2.2 × Time of irrigation (min)*) ÷ Discharge of dripper (litre/hour)

For first cut, apply 24 kg N and 12.8 kg P2O5  per acre in 10 equal splits with drip 
irrigation. Fertigate with first 1/10th of N and P2O5 with first irrigation just after planting 
and thereafter, remaining 9 doses of N and P2O5 should be fertigated in 9 equal splits 
at 9 days interval starting one month after planting. This will result in about 25 per 
cent higher oil yield along with saving of 36 per cent irrigation water and 20 per cent 
nutrients over check basin. Use urea (46 %) and mono ammonium phosphate (12-61-
0 grade) for supplying N and P2O5 respectively.

Weed Control: To obtain good yield and high-quality oil, the crop should be kept 
free from weeds at all the stages of growth. In the early stages of growth, a wheel-hoe 
may be used. Alternatively, pre-emergence application of 350 mL  per acre Goal 23.5 
EC (oxyfluorfen) using 200 litres of water can effectively control the weeds.

89



Harvesting and Yield: The crop should preferably be harvested at the flower 
initiation stage. If the lower leaves of the plants turn yellow and start shedding, 
harvesting may be done earlier. Harvest the crop, leaving 6-8 cm long stumps to 
secure better sprouting. Two cuttings can be taken, first in June and the second in 
September. The yield of the crop is 100-125 quintals per acre of fresh herbs which 
contains 0.5 to 0.75% oil.

Processing and Marketing: After harvesting, allow the crop to wilt overnight in the 
field and subject it to simple distillation. Some private distillation units provide facilities 
for farmers to extract oil. The farmers are advised to plant mentha only in that area 
where the distillation units are available.
Plant Protection
A. Insect Pests

1. Termite (Odentoterms obseus): Termites attack the underground parts of the 
plants and damage the roots and the stems of mentha. 

2. Cutworm (Agrotis spp.): Cutworms cut the young plants at the ground-level. 
They remain hidden near the base of the plants during day-time. 

3. Jassid and Whitefly: The attack of these sucking pests adversely affects the 
plant growth and oil content.  

4. Hairy caterpillars: Hairy caterpillars, if appearing in an epidemic form, cause 
serious damage by feeding on the leaves and the tender stems. When young, they 
feed gregariously. The grown up caterpillars may migrate from one field to another. 
Adopt the following control measures:
•	 Use light-traps for the destruction of moths.
•	 Young larvae are gregarious. They can be destroyed by plucking the infested 

leaves or by pulling out the infested plants and burying them underground.
The grown up caterpillars can be destroyed by crushing them under feet. 

B. Diseases
1. Root rot and Stem rot (Rhizoctonia bataticola): The infected portion shows 

brown lesions which turn dark and later increase in size. The leaves wither and die. 
Uproot and destroy the infected plants. Do not take the planting stock from an infected 
field. Avoid growing mentha year after year in the same field. 

90



CELERY

Celery, commonly known as Karnauli, is grown mostly in districts of Amritsar, 
Gurdaspur and Tarntaran. The seed  and  its  products  are  exported.

Climatic Requirements: It requires mild cool climate for luxuriant growth in the 
early stages and warm dry weather at maturity.

Soil Type: All soils, except the saline, alkali and waterlogged ones are suitable. 
It, however, thrives best on loamy soils rich in organic matter and retentive of soil 
moisture.

Rotations: Cauliflower/Potato (early)-Celery, Paddy-Pea (early)-Celery, Paddy-
Celery, Paddy-Potato-Celery, Basmati rice-Celery-Bajra fodder and Maize (August)-
Celery-Bajra fodder.
Variety

Punjab Celery 1 (2016): It is a high yielding variety of celery. It produced an 
average seed yield of 4.5 quintal per acre. Its seeds contain 1.9 per cent essential oil 
with total oil content of 20.1 per cent. The seeds are brown in colour with characteristic 
odour and pungent taste. Punjab Celery 1 starts bearing flowers in March and matures 
in 140-150 days after transplanting.
Agronomic Practices

Preparatory Tillage: The land should be thoroughly levelled and seedbed 
prepared by giving 4 or 5 ploughings, each followed by a planking.

Seed Rate: 400 g seed per acre.
Time of Nursery Sowing:  September 15 to October 15.
Nursery Raising:  Mix 8-10 tonnes of well-rotten farmyard manure or compost 

per acre into the soil and give 4 or 5 ploughings to obtain fine tilth. Prepare seedbeds 
measuring 8m x 1.25 m or any other convenient size. Eight such seedbeds, will give 
required seedlings for transplanting in an acre. A shallow channel should be provided 
around the beds to facilitate irrigation. To each bed apply 150 g mixture of calcium 
ammonium nitrate and single superphosphate in equal proportions. Sow 50 g of clean 
seed on each bed. Cover the seed with a mixture of farmyard manure and soil. Apply 
water with a sprinkler immediately after sowing. 
For early and higher germination, apply 4-6 kg 
paddy straw mulch on each bed of 10 m2. The •	Sow the nursery between 15 
seed germinates after 12-15 days. The mulch September and 15 October.
should be removed 5 to 10 days after the •	Transplant 60-70 days old 
initiation of germination. About a fortnight after seedlings of same size 
the germination of seed, apply 100 g calcium during mid November to end 
ammonium nitrate to each bed. If seedling size is December. 
not normal, apply another dose of 100 g calcium •	To avoid shattering losses, 
ammonium nitrate per bed after about a month. harvest the crop when seeds 
The seedlings will be ready for transplanting in 
about 60-70 days. Irrigate the nursery regularly in most of the umbels turn 
and keep it free from weeds. light brown. 

91



Time and Method of Transplanting: 60 to 70 days old seedlings should be 
transplanted from November 15 to end December at a spacing of 45 x 25 cm. Apply 
light irrigation to the seedbeds a day before uprooting the seedlings.

Relay Cropping of Celery in Pea: Adopt relay cropping of celery in short duration 
varieties of pea for higher returns. For this purpose, sow 2 rows of pea on 60 cm ridges. 
Broadcast 4 kg seed of celery per acre immediately after first irrigation to pea or sow 2 
rows of pea on 60 cm ridges in the fields where celery was grown during previous year 
and retain naturally germinated celery from the shattered seed of previous year crop.
Uproot pea after taking 1-2 pickings and give hoeing to celery. Maintain proper plant  
population by thinning and/or gap filling wherever needed. Apply irrigation after gap 
filling. In relay cropping of pea and celery, adopt recommended practices for pea and 
after uprooting of pea, follow the practices recommended for celery.

Fertilizer Application:  For medium fertility soils, the following fertilizers may be 
applied:

Nutrients (kg/acre) Fertilizers (kg/acre)
 N P2O5 Urea         DAP* or            Superphosphate
 40 16 90 35 100

* When 35 kg DAP is used, apply 75 urea per acre.
Apply 1/2 N and full amount of P2O5 at transplanting and apply 1/4 N 45 days after 

transplanting and 1/4 N 75 days after transplanting.
Weed Control: Two or three hoeings preferably with improved wheel hand hoe are 

enough to keep the crop free from weeds.
Irrigation: Light and frequent irrigations should be applied.
Harvesting and Threshing: The crop should be harvested when seeds in most of 

the  umbels turn light brown in colour. Delay in harvesting results in loss through seed-
shedding. Since the seed is very small and light, therefore, winnowing and sieving 
should be avoided, when wind velocity is high.

Insect Pests: Aphids sometimes appear as pest. They suck cell-sap from the 
leaves and thus, adversely affect the crop growth. 
Hints to minimize shattering losses
1. 	 Use seedlings of the same age and size.
2. 	 Harvest the crop at right stage.
3. 	 Harvest the crop early in the morning hours.
4. 	 Transport the harvested crop immediately to threshing floor.

CORIANDER
It can be sown on a wide variety of soil but it performs best in well-drained sandy 

loam to loamy soils. 
Sow 8-10 kg healthy and disease free capsules (seeds) per acre. Rub the capsules 

gently to break them into 2 to 4 parts to get uniform and good germination. Sow the 

92



crop during last week of October to first week of November.  The sowing should be 
done in rows 30 cm apart using pora method. Apply  30  kg  N  (65  kg urea) per acre in 
2 splits, half at sowing and the remaining half at flower initiation. Two weedings should 
be done, first about 4 weeks after sowing and the second 5-6 weeks thereafter. The 
first irrigation may be given about 3 weeks after sowing. Subsequent irrigations (3-4) 
may be given when required taking care that there should not be moisture stress at 
flowering and seed development stages. 

Harvest when the capsules are mature but green as green coloured capsules 
fetches a premium price over the brown coloured over-ripe capsules. Its average yield 
is 2.5 to 3 quintals of seed per acre.

 
FENNEL

Fennel is commonly known as saunf. Well drained sandy loam to loamy soil is best 
for its cultivation. 

Ajmer Fennel 2 (2023): It produced an average seed yield of 5.0 quintals per acre 
which was 17.1 % higher than Local variety. Its seeds contain 1.6 to 1.8 % of essential 
oil. It takes 170-175 days for maturity. 

The time of sowing is last week of October to first week of November. 
Sow the seed 3-4 cm deep by kera method in rows 45 cm apart using 4 kg seed 

per acre. Apply 20 kg nitrogen (45 kg urea) in 2-3 splits depending upon the texture 
of the soil. Apply the first irrigation 10-15 days after sowing to ensure proper seedling-
emergence and subsequent irrigation when needed. One or two weedings are required 
depending upon the intensity of the weeds. 

Harvest when the umbel changes its colour from green to light yellow. For getting 
quality seeds for table purpose, harvest the crop at dough stage in early April.  

DILL SEED
Dill seed is commonly known as soe. Well drained sandy loam to loamy soil is best 

for its cultivation. 
Sow 2 kg seed per acre in 45 cm apart rows with a depth of 3-4 cm during second 

fortnight of October. Apply 35 kg nitrogen (75 kg Urea) in 2 or 3 splits depending 
upon the texture of the soil. Apply first irrigation 10-15 days after sowing to ensure 
proper seedling emergence. Subsequent irrigations should be given to ensure proper 
moisture throughout the growth period. In March and April, apply light irrigations on 
calm days to avoid lodging. Give 1-2 hoeings depending upon the intensity of weeds. 
The first hoeing may be done 30-40 days after sowing and overcrowded seedlings 
may be thinned at this stage. 

Harvest the crop, when the umbel changes its colour from green to light-yellow. 
Harvest in the morning and transport to the threshing floor immediately to prevent seed 
shedding. The average yield is 3-4 quintals of seed per acre.

93



HONEY PLANT
Honey plant is an important medicinal crop grown for seeds. It performs best in well 

drained sandy loam to loamy soils. The time of nursery sowing is whole of September. 
Use 400 g seed for one acre crop. 

Mix 8-10 tonnes well-rotten farmyard manure per acre into the soil. Prepare beds 
measuring 8 m x 1.25 m with a shallow channel around the beds to facilitate drainage 
and irrigation. Eight such beds will provide seedlings for transplanting in an acre.  Sow 
50 g clean seed on each bed after mixing of 80 g urea and 150 g single superphosphate 
in surface soil. Cover the seed with a mixture of farmyard manure and soil. Apply water 
with a sprinkler immediately after sowing. Apply 50 g urea to each bed about a fortnight 
after the emergence of seedlings. If seedling growth is not normal, apply another dose 
of 50 g urea per bed after about a month. Irrigate the nursery regularly and keep it free 
from weeds. Apply light irrigation to the seedbeds a day before uprooting the seedling.

Transplant 60 to 70 days old seedlings during November at a row spacing of  60 
cm and plant-to-plant distance of 30 cm. Apply  25 kg  nitrogen (55 kg  urea) in  2-3  
splits   depending upon the texture of soil. Two or three hoeing are enough to keep the 
crop free from weeds. Apply light and frequent irrigations in the initial stages for proper 
establishment of the seedlings. Ensure adequate moisture throughout the growth 
period particularly at the time of branching and flowering stages. 

The crop is ready for harvest by the first week of May. Harvest when the umbels 
change colour from green to light yellow as delay in harvesting causes shattering of 
seeds. The crop should be harvested in the morning hours and transported to the 
threshing floor immediately to prevent seed shedding. It yields about 4-5 quintals 
seeds per acre.

FENUGREEK
Fenugreek commonly known as metha can be grown on all types of soils except 

water logged, alkaline and saline ones. However, it thrives best on well drained loamy 
soils. 

ML-150 (1995) is an improved variety, moderately resistant to powdery mildew 
and stem rot diseases. Its plants are erect with dark green leaves. It has bright, yellow 
and bold seeds. Its average grain yield is 6.0 quintal per acre. It can also be grown for 
fodder purpose. 

To get fine seedbed, 2-3 ploughings followed by planking are required. Sowing 
should be done in last week of October to first week of November at proper soil 
moisture conditions. Sow 12 kg seed per acre 3-4 cm deep in lines 22.5 cm apart. 
Apply 5 kg nitrogen (11 kg urea) and 8 kg P2O5 (50 kg single superphosphate) per acre 
at the time of sowing. 

Three or four irrigations are enough to raise the crop. One or two hoeings may be 
given for effective weed control. Harvest the crop when colour of the pods changes 
from green to light yellow. Delay in harvesting results in shattering of seeds. It yields 6 
quintals of seed per acre.

94



6. FODDER CROPS
 

	 The area under fodder crops in the state remains around 9.0 lakh hectares 
(about 3.5 lakh hectares in rabi) and the annual production of green fodder is about 
716 lakh tonnes. As per 20th Livestock Census-2019, the total livestock population 
in Punjab is 70.5 lakh, out of which 65.5 lakh are bovines which are to be provided 
sufficient fodder of good quality. Each bovine gets green fodder supply of about 30 
kg per day, but actually 40 kg green fodder per animal is required. Therefore, the 
present availability of green fodder is inadequate. On the basis of requirement per 
animal per day, approximately 956 lakh tonnes of green fodder is required annually. 
Therefore, fodder production in the state has to be substantially increased. With the 
increase of cross bred animals which need more fodder, its deficiency will be further 
aggravated unless efforts are made to increase the production of fodder. Therefore, 
fodder production in the state needs to be substantially increased.
Important Hints
• The supply of protein to animals from legumes is cheaper than from concentrates. 
The non-legume forages are rich in energy. It is, therefore, essential that fodders 
should be grown as mixtures, in which legumes, such as berseem, shaftal, senji and 
non-legumes, such as oats, ryegrass are grown together.

• Follow recommended time of sowing and seed rate and treat the seed before sowing.
• Use fertilizers in balanced amount.
• To get better quality of fodder, cut the fodder crop at proper stage.
• Irrigate the fodder crop one week before cutting to minimize anti-quality factors.
• Use specific herbicide as per recommendation in case of mixture of forage crops 
grown. Avoid use of unrecommended agro-chemicals on fodder crops as this may be 
harmful to dairy animals.

• Plants attacked by any insect-pest or disease-affected plants should be uprooted and 
destroyed.

• Do not grow fodder crops on soils high in selenium.
• An adequate supply of quality fodders during the lean periods of November-December 
and May-June can be ensured by preserving the green fodder as silage and hay.

NUTRITIVE VALUE OF FODDERS
Fodder Crude protein Total digestible nutrients 

on dry-matter basis (%) on dry matter basis (%)
Berseem 18.0 60.5
Shaftal 21.0 58.5
Lucerne 22.0 59.5
Senji 18.0 62.0
Oats 9.5 64.0
Ryegrass 16.0 63.5

95



BERSEEM

Berseem gives a highly nutritious and palatable fodder in repeated cuttings from 
November to mid-June. It is cultivated on about 2.25 lakh hectares.  

Climatic Requirements: Berseem needs mild temperature for germination and 
establishment. Its growth is restricted during intensely cold or frosty weather.

Soil Type: It grows well on medium to heavy soils and withstands alkalinity.
Improved Varieties 

BL 44 (2021): It is a quick growing variety with more number of tillers. It is 
moderately resistant to stem rot disease. It has superior nutritional quality especially 
for in-vitro dry matter digestibility. It supplies green fodder up to first week of June and 
yields about 395 quintals per acre of green fodder. 

BL 43 (2017): It is a quick growing, tall variety with more number of tillers. It 
supplies about 390 quintals green fodder per acre up to first week of June and gives 
good seed yield. 

BL 42 (2003): It is a quick-growing variety which produces more number of tillers 
per unit area. It is tolerant to stem rot disease. It has superior nutritional quality. It 
supplies green fodder upto first week of June and yields about 440 quintals per acre of 
green fodder and has high seed yield. 

BL 10 (1983): It is a longer duration variety and supplies green fodder upto mid 
June. Its seed is small. It  is  moderately tolerant to stem  rot  disease. Its nutritive value 
and voluntary intake are high. It yields about 410 quintals per acre green fodder. Its 
seed crop matures in the last week of June.
Agronomic Practices

Preparatory Tillage: A good crop is raised on land which had been properly 
levelled and is free from weeds. Prepare a good seedbed with 2-3 ploughings, each 
followed by a planking.

Time of Sowing: The last week of September to first week of October is the best 
time of sowing.

Seed Inoculation: The inoculation of berseem with the specific Rhizobium culture 
will increase the forage yield. Moist the seed recommended for one acre with minimum 
amount of water. Mix thoroughly one packet of Rhizobium culture with seed on a clean 
pucca floor/terpal and dry it in shade. Then  broadcast the inoculated seed in standing 
water on the same day, preferably in the evening because the direct sun light kills the 
bacteria. This bio-fertilizer is available with the Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana 
Seed Shop at Gate No. 1 and Krishi Vigyan Kendra/Farm Advisory Service Centres in 
different districts.

Seed Rate and Method of Sowing: When the weather is calm, broadcast 8 kg 
seed in standing water. In case of high winds, the seed should be broadcast evenly in 
dry field followed immediately by raking and irrigation. The seed should be free from 
seeds of chicory (Kashni) and other weeds. To ensure this, put the berseem  seeds 
into water and sieve or decant the floating weed seed.

96



For obtaining a high yield of good-quality •	 To check reddening of leaves
fodder, mix 750g of mustard seed with the - 	Do not grow berseem where 
full seed-rate of berseem. Alternatively mix tubewell water is not fit for 
berseem with oats, using 12 kg seed of  oats. irrigation.
In this case, oat seed is broadcast and mixed - 	Treat berseem seed with 
with the soil with a cultivator. The field is Rhizobium culture before 
irrigated immediately and the berseem seed sowing. 
is broadcasted evenly as usual, in standing - 	Use well rotten farm yard 
water. manure.

Berseem+ryegrass when grown together •	 To manage manganese 
make a good compatible mixture. To obtain deficiency, spray the crop 
high yield of good quality fodder, add 2-3 with 0.5% manganese 
kg seed of ryegrass per acre with full seed sulphate solution  as per 
rate of berseem or mix 1 kg ryegrass seed recommendations. 
per acre with the recommended seed rate of •	 For the control of stem rot 
berseem+oats or berseem+sarson mixture. disease don’t sow the crop in 
Mix some moist soil with ryegrass seed and badly infested fields for 3-4 
broadcast evenly. Then broadcast berseem years.
seed, rake the field and irrigate immediately. •	 For higher seed yield spray 

the seed crop with potassium 
Fertilizer Application: Apply 6 tonnes nitrate or salicylic acid as per 

of farmyard manure alongwith 20 kg recommendations.
phosphorus (125 kg superphosphate) per 
acre at sowing time. Where farmyard manure 
has not been added, apply 10 kg nitrogen (22 kg Urea) and 30 kg phosphorus (185 kg 
superphosphate) per acre. The application of phosphorus in the form of superphosphate 
adds sulphur. Where ryegrass has been mixed in berseem, apply 10 kg N (22 kg Urea) 
per acre after each cutting.

Manganese Deficiency: Manganese deficiency generally appears in coarse 
textured soils especially where berseem follows rice. The symptoms appear more 
prominently when the crop reaches the cutting stage. In the early stages of deficiency, 
the mid-stem leaves of berseem show grey to yellow mottling. Tip and about 1/3rd area 
from the base remains green. Later this mottling spreads on the entire leaf and colour 
changes from pinkish to brown which coalesce to form necrotic lesions. 

Where the deficiency is noticed, spray the crop twice or thrice with 0.5% manganese 
sulphate solution (1 kg manganese sulphate in 200 litres of water per acre) at weekly 
intervals on sunny days. Spray the crop after two weeks of cutting.

Weed Control: Under situations where itsit (Trianthema portulacastrum) is 
a problem, sow berseem mixed with raya which is fast growing crop and exerts 
tremendous smothering effect on this weed. Where the problem of this weed is serious, 
delay the sowing to the second week of October, as during this period, the incidence of 
the weed is drastically reduced due to the fall in temperature.

Irrigation: The first irrigation is important and should be applied early to get a 
good crop stand. The first irrigation may be given within 3-5 days in light soils and 6-8 

97



days in heavy soils after sowing. Afterwards it may be applied within 8-10 days during 
summer and 10-15 days during winter depending upon soil type and weather.

In sandy loam soil, irrigate the crop with good quality water at sowing and later 
irrigations with alternate use of saline tubewell water with canal water can be given. 

Harvesting:  First cutting is ready in about 50 days after sowing and subsequent 
cuttings at 40 days intervals during winter and 30 days intervals in spring, thus giving 
4-6 cuttings in all. Harvesting of berseem can be done with scythe that saves 60% of 
labour.

Seed Production: The seed yield of berseem mainly depends upon the time of 
last cut for green fodder and leaving it for seed production. The decision varies with 
the variety, type of soil and climate. The last cutting should be taken relatively early in 
low humidity and late in high humidity areas.  The optimum time of leaving the crop 
for seed production is the first fortnight of April for BL 42, BL 43 and BL 44 varieties 
whereas it is second fortnight of April for BL-10 variety. Shaftal, kashni and other weeds 
should be completely removed from the seed crop. Irrigate the crop frequently during 
the formation and ripening of the seed.

A successful crop of berseem for seed production can be sown in end November 
after the harvest of basmati rice. It provides three cuttings of green fodder before 
leaving the crop for seed production.

The seed crop of berseem can also be sown as late as the first fortnight of January.  
This late sown crop should also be left for seed production as mentioned above after 
taking two cuttings. The management practices of the late sown crop are the same as 
in normal sown crop. The average seed yield is about 2 quintals per acre. 

To get higher seed yield, give two sprays of 2% Potassium nitrate (13:0:45) (2 
kg potassium nitrate in 100 litres of water per acre) at weekly interval, starting from 
flower initiation. Alternatively, give two sprays of 7.5 g of Salicylic acid using 100 litres 
of water per acre. Salicyclic acid must be dissolved in 225 mL of ethyl alcohol before 
making the final volume in 100 litres.
Plant Protection   
(a) Insect Pests 

1. Black ants: Ants takes away the germinating seed in to their nest. Locate the 
nests of the black ants and destroy them.

2. Bihar hairy caterpillar (Bhabu Kuta): It is polyphagous and sporadic pest. It 
attacks berseem crop twice in a season. In September-October larvae devour the young 
crop to the ground level and the farmers have to resow it. Again it feeds voraciously on 
plant foliage and causes severe losses in March-April. Weeds like Gutpatna, Bathu, 
Jangli Palak and wild castor are the alternate host plants on which the pest feeds in 
gregarious phase and later on migrates to berseem.  Destroy these weeds growing 
adjoining to berseem fields before its sowing.

3. Surface grasshopper:  Particularly Oxya spp. are sporadic pests and feed 
voraciously on berseem during May-June.  More than 90% of the population of Oxya 
migrate from other crops to berseem during this period.

98



4. Gram caterpillar: (Helicoverpa armigera) The attacks of this pest is serious on 
seed crop. Avoid raising of berseem seed crop adjoining to tomato, gram, late sown 
wheat, sathi moong, sathi mash and sunflower on which the pest multiplies and later 
shifts to berseem. If it is not possible, the pest should be controlled properly on these 
crops grown in the vicinity of berseem in order to check its migration to berseem fields.

5. Cabbage semilooper:  It is a polyphagous pest and its larvae which are green 
in colour cause severe damage to berseem in March-April. Larvae make round holes 
in the leaves and defoliate the plants. During March-April, harvest the berseem crop at 
regular interval (30 days) to avoid lodging which creates favourable conditions for pest 
survival and multiplication and also hinders the activity of predatory birds which play 
key role to control the pest.
(b) Diseases

1. Stem rot  (Sclerotinia sclerotiorum): The disease symptoms are visible during 
January and February when temperature is low. The fungus which is present as sclerotia 
in the soil attacks the basal portion of the stem and causes it to rot. It produces white 
cottony mycellium which begins to grow on the dead organic matter on the surface of 
the soil. The white mycellium can very easily be spotted in the field around the wilted 
patches of the berseem crop. The field affected by the pathogen should be heavily 
flooded during summer months so that hard, black sclerotia, present in the soil may be 
destroyed. Cut the crop and expose the soil to the sun. Do  not  sow  berseem in badly 
infested fields for 3-4 years. 

OATS
It comes second after berseem from nutritional point. It is grown on about 1.04 lakh 

hectares.
Climatic Requirements: Oats makes best growth in cool and moist weather. High 

temperature at blossoming increases the proportion of empty spikelets and reduces 
the seed yield.

Soil Type: Oats can be grown on all types of soils, except the alkaline or water 
logged soils.
Improved Varieties

OL 17 (2024):  It is a single cut variety for irrigated areas of Punjab. Its plants are 
tall, having long and broad leaves with more leafiness and tillering ability. Its fodder 
and silage quality parameters viz; In vitro dry matter digestibility and crude protein are 
at par to OL 15 and OL 13. On an average, it yields about 315 quintals of green fodder 
per acre. Its average seed yield is 9.6 quintals per acre.

OL 16 (2022): It is a dual type variety for irrigated areas of Punjab. Its plants are 
medium tall having broad leaves and more leafiness with profuse tillering. It has good 
fodder, grain and flour quality as well. Its first cut for fodder can be taken at 65-70 days 
after sowing and yields on an average about 90.0 quintals of green fodder per acre. Its 
regenerated crop, upon maturity gives on an average of 7.6 quintals per acre of grain 
yield. 

99



OL 15 (2021): It is a single cut variety for irrigated areas of Punjab. Its plants are 
tall, having long and broad leaves with more leafiness and tillering ability. Its fodder 
quality is better than OL 12, OL 11, Kent and at par with OL 13. On an average, it yields 
about 319 quintals of green fodder per acre. Its seed yield is about 9.8 quintals per 
acre. 

OL 14 (2020):  It is a multicut variety for irrigated areas of Punjab. Its plants are tall 
with profuse tillering and leafy growth. The leaves are longer and broader. Its fodder 
quality is superior in terms of total digestible nutrients (TDN) and digestible crude 
protein (DCP) than OL 10. On an average, it yields about 307 quintals of green fodder 
per acre. Its seed yield is 10.9 quintal per acre. 

OL 13 (2020):  It is a single cut variety for irrigated areas of Punjab. Its plants 
are tall with profuse tillering and leafy growth. The leaves are longer and broader. Its 
fodder quality is superior in terms of DCP than OL 12 and Kent. On an average, it 
yields about 305 quintals of green fodder per acre. Its seed yield is 9.7 quintal per acre.

OL 12 (2018):  It is a single cut variety for irrigated areas of Punjab. Its plants are 
tall, having long and broad leaves with more leafiness and tillering ability. Its fodder 
quality is better than OL 11, OL 9 and Kent. On an average, it yields about 258 quintals 
of green fodder per acre. Its seed yield is about 8.6 quintals per acre.

OL 11 (2017):  It is a single cut variety with tall plants, leafy and profused tillering 
ability. Its fodder quality is superior to OL 9 and Kent. On an average, it yields about 
245 quintals of green fodder and 8.5 quintals of seed per acre.

OL 10 (2014): It is a multicut variety. Its plants are tall with profused tillering and 
leafy growth. The leaves are longer and broader. Its fodder quality is superior in terms 
of TDN and DCP than OL-9 and Kent. On an average, it yields about 275 quintals of 
green fodder per acre. 

Kent (1986): It is tall, erect growing variety suitable for single/two cuttings. Seeds 
are bold. It gives 210 quintals of green fodder per acre. It produces 8 quintals of seed 
per acre.
Agronomic Practices

Preparatory Tillage: Plough the land three times to make it free from weeds.
Time of Sowing: The optimum time of sowing is from second week to last week 

of October.
Seed Rate and Method of Sowing: Drill 25 kg seed per acre in rows 20 cm apart. 

However, 10-15% higher fodder yield can be obtained through bi-directional method of 
sowing using the same seed rate. Oats can also be sown without seed bed preparation 
with zero till drill after the harvesting of rice. This also helps in timely sowing of crop 
after basmati. “PAU Happy Seeder” can be used for sowing and simultaneous inter-row 
paddy straw mulch application without straw removal/burning after stubble shaving in 
combine harvested paddy fields.  

In oats + raya mixture, sow oats as given above and broadcast 1.0 kg raya per 
acre followed by planking. This mixture gives good quality higher fodder yield from first 
cut at 55-65 days after sowing during lean period. The second cut of oats can be taken 
either for fodder or seed. 

100



Fertilizer Application:  In single cut oats, apply 15 kg N (33 kg Urea) and 8 kg 
P2O5 (50 kg superphosphate) per acre at sowing and 15 kg N (33 kg Urea) 30-40 days 
afterwards. In two cut variety, apply fertilizer to first cut as recommended for single cut 
oats and apply 20 kg N (44 kg urea) per acre to second cut after sprouting.

Weed Control: Interculture is generally not necessary, but the growth of weeds 
must be checked in the early stages of the crop by weeding, if necessary.

Irrigation: Three to four irrigations including the pre-sowing irrigation are sufficient. 
Harvesting: The harvesting of single cut oats should be done from boot to milk 

stage. In multicut oats take first cut at 65-70 days after sowing and second cut at boot 
to milk stage.

Seed Production: Seed crop should be sown in the second fortnight of November 
and it gives about 8 quintals seed per acre. Use 15 kg seed per acre in rows 30 cm 
apart. Apply 10 kg N (22 kg urea) and 8 kg P2O5 (50 kg superphosphate) per acre at 
sowing and 10 kg N (22 kg urea) 30-40 days after sowing. 

However, the crop sown before 15th November may be left for seed after taking 
fodder at  65-70 days after sowing. In this case, apply an additional dose of 8 kg N per 
acre after sprouting. This crop gives about 6 quintals of seed besides 100 quintals per 
acre of additional green fodder.
Plant Protection 
(a) Insect Pests

Oat aphid (Rhopalosiphum padi): Oat aphid appears on oats during January to 
March. It sucks sap from the plants and lowers down the quality of fodder. Coccinellid 
beetles, syrphid fly and heavy rainfall keep natural check on its multiplication. Do not 
spray any insecticide on fodder crop as it is hazardous to animals and also kills the 
predators of the aphid.
(b) Diseases

1. Loose smut (Ustilago avenae): The individual flowers of the oats panicle are 
replaced by spore masses. Use disease free seed.

2. Covered smut (U. kolleri): The smut destroys the kernels completely and 
replaces them with black masses of spores  which remain closed  within the affected 
spikelets till harvested. Rogue out and destroy the smutted ears. Use disease free 
seed.

101



RYEGRASS

It is a multicut non-legume fodder and gives about five to six cuttings in rabi 
season. It is highly nutritious, palatable and easily digestible fodder crop. It is grown 
approximately on an area of 11 thousand hectares.

Climatic and Soil Requirements: Ryegrass needs mild temperature for 
germination and growth. It grows well on medium to heavy fertility soils.
Improved Variety 

Punjab Ryegrass 2 (2020): It is a multi cut, fast growing, late flowering variety. Its 
leaves are long and broad. It has better fodder nutritional quality especially in vitro dry 
matter digestibility than Punjab Ryegrass 1 variety. It gives six cuttings from November 
to May with a green fodder yield of 327 quintals per acre. 

Punjab Ryegrass 1 (1991): It is quick growing variety with soft stem and leaves 
which are relished by the animals. Its average green fodder yield is 325 quintals per 
acre in five-six cuttings from November to May.
Agronomic Practices

Preparatory Tillage: A good crop is raised on lands which had been properly 
levelled. Prepare a good seed bed with 3-4 ploughings each followed by planking.

Time of Sowing: The optimum time of sowing is the last week of September to the 
first week of October. 

Seed Rate and Method of Sowing:   Sow 3 kg seed per acre by broadcast method. 
Mix the seed with moist soil for even broadcasting in dry land followed immediately by 
raking and irrigation.

Fertilizer Application:  Apply 15-20 tonnes of farmyard manure at the time of land 
preparation. Apply 15 kg of N (33 kg Urea) per acre at sowing time and 15 kg N (33 kg 
Urea) about 30 days afterwards. In subsequent cuttings 30 kg N per acre (66 kg Urea) 
should be applied immediately after cutting.

Irrigation:  First irrigation should be applied immediately after sowing and second 
irrigation after about five days of sowing. Afterwards, irrigate the crop at an interval of 
about 10 days depending upon the prevailing weather conditions.

In sandy loam soil, irrigate the crop with good quality water at sowing and later 
irrigations with rotation of two irrigations with saline water followed by one irrigation of 
canal water can be given. 

Harvesting: The first cutting is ready in about 55 days after sowing. Subsequent 
cuttings are ready at about a month interval.

Seed Production: The crop sown for fodder is left for seed producton in the middle 
of March. Apply 15 Kg N per acre (33 kg urea) for higher seed yield. Irrigate the crop 
frequently during the formation and ripening of the seed. However, care should be 
taken that the seed crop does not lodge. Seed crop can also be sown separately upto 
November at the seed rate of 2-3 kg per acre in rows 50 cm apart. The harvesting of 
the mature crop should not be delayed as it may result in shattering of seed. The seed 
crop matures in the first week of June. It produces 2-3 quintals of seed per acre.

Caution: Ryegrass is very sensitive to herbicides. Therefore, no herbicide should 
be sprayed.

102



SHAFTAL

Shaftal commonly known as Chhattala or Bhukal is a highly nutritious legume 
fodder. 

Shaftal 69 is an improved variety having long stalks leafy plants and light pink 
flowers. It is highly resistant to stem rot disease and suitable for disease infested fields. 
Shaftal supplies on an average 390 quintals of  green fodder  per acre up to mid may.

The optimum sowing time is last week of September to first week of October. Sow 
4-5 kg seed per acre by same method as given in berseem. Shaftal can be sown in 
mixture with mustard (750 g), oats (12 kg) and ryegrass (2-3 kg) per acre. 

Apply 5 kg nitrogen (11 kg urea), 20 kg phosphorus (125 kg single super phosphorus) 
per acre at sowing. When ryegrass has been mixed with shaftal, apply 5 kg nitrogen 
(11 kg urea) per acre after each cutting. 

Apply first irrigation within 3-5 days after sowing, then irrigate at 8-10 days interval 
in summer and 10-15 days during winter depending upon the weather. 

The first  cutting is ready in about 55 days after sowing and subsequent cuttings 
can be taken at an interval of 30 days. The plant protection measures of shaftal are 
same as that of berseem.

LUCERNE
Lucerne is a leguminous crop which is grown on about 1.5 thousand hectares. 
Climatic Requirements: It does well on irrigated soil of arid and semi-arid tract.
Soil Type: Well-drained loamy soils are the best for this crop. It cannot withstand 

alkaline and waterlogged conditions.
Improved Variety 

LL Composite 5 (1982): It is a tall, erect and fast growing annual variety. It has 
broad dark green leaves with purple flowers. It has bold seeds and  is highly resistant 
to downy mildew. It gives eight cuttings upto first week of July and yields 280 quintals 
green fodder per acre.
Agronomic Practices

Preparatory Tillage: Plough the field once with a disc harrow and 2-3 times with a 
cultivator, followed by planking each time for securing a fine seedbed.

Seed Rate and Method of Sowing: Mid-October is the best time for sowing 
lucerne. Sow 6-8 kg of seed per acre in rows 30 cm apart with pora or drill at a depth 
of 2 to 4 cm in proper soil moisture condition (Wattar). The seed should be free from 
cuscuta (Amarbel) and other weed seeds.

For obtaining high yield, especially from the first cutting of lucerne crop, broadcast 
15 kg oats seed per acre and mix it with soil with a cultivator before sowing lucerne. 
Alternatively, broadcast 750 g per acre of mustard seed along with the full seed rate 
of lucerne.

103



Seed Inoculation: The inoculation of lucerne with the specific Rhizobium culture 
will increase the forage yield as well as improve the fodder quality. Rhizobium meliloti 
culture is available at PAU Seed Shop, Gate No. 1, Ludhiana and Krishi Vigyan Kendra/
Farm Advisory Service Centres in different districts. The method of inoculation is the 
same as in berseem.

Fertilizer Application: Ten kg of N (22 kg Urea) and 32 kg of P2O5 (200 kg of 
superphosphate) per acre should be applied at sowing. 

Weed Control: To the planted crop, give the first hoeing about one month after 
sowing and the second after the rainy season. 

Irrigation: Give the first irrigation about a month after sowing and the subsequent 
irrigations after 15-30 days, depending upon the weather. During the rainy season, do 
not allow water to stagnate in the crop.

Harvesting: The planted crop takes about 75 days to become ready for the first 
cutting. The subsequent cuttings may be taken at an interval of 30-40 days.

Seed Production: Take the last cutting of fodder in mid March. Stop irrigation after 
full blossoming to arrest further vegetative growth and thus ensure good seed yield. 
The seed crop should be sown in rows 45 to 60 cm apart. The harvesting of the mature 
crop should not be delayed, as it may result in the shedding of pods. Harvest when two 
third of the pods dry up. On an average, it yields 75-100 kg of seed per acre.
Plant Protection 
Insect Pests

1. Lucerne caterpillar, jassid and lucerne weevil: Adults of lucerne weevil 
aestivate from April to October under the scales of Eucalyptus trees and attack the 
crop sown near these trees. Remove the scales alongwith adults, in a gunny bag and 
burn them. If the crop is infested with lucerne weevil larvae, harvest the crop with least 
disturbance to the plants and collect it in pallies so that larvae are removed with the 
fodder from the fields.

2.  Alfalfa aphid is sometimes serious in this crop. 
3. Gram caterpillar (Helicoverpa armigera): Same as given against this insect in 

berseem.
SENJI

Senji (sweet clover) is an important forage legume suitable for cultivation under 
restricted moisture supply and can thrive under a wide range of climatic and soil 
conditions. 

Senji safed 76 (white flowered) and YSL 106 (yellow flowered) are recommended 
varieties, which yield about 128 quintals of green fodder per acre. 

YSL 106 is sown from end of September to end of October, while Senji safed 76 
can be sown during second fortnight of November. 

Broadcast 15 kg husked seed per acre, mix it in the soil and irrigate there after. In 
all two or three irrigations are enough. 

Apply 25 kg Phosphorus (155 Kg Single superphosphate) per acre at sowing. 
Harvest the crop, when it is full blossom. 

104



SILAGE MAKING
Oat crop can be preserved as silage. It is essential that in making silage, the 

material is thoroughly chopped to a preferable length i.e. between 5 to 8 cm. Important 
points for preparing a high quality silage are given below:
1.	 Prepare silo trench of 10 m x 3 m x 1.5 m near the cattle shed. About 350-400 

quintals of green fodder can be packed in this trench which will supply silage for a 
herd of 6-7 cows or buffaloes for 4 months at 40 kg per head per day.

2.	 Oat crop should be harvested at their optimum stage of digestibility i.e. at milk 
stage.

3.	 Chop the harvested crop and pack it into the silo-trench. A crop with 30-35% dry 
matter ferments into a high quality silage. If moisture content is too high, let the 
crop wilt in the field for 1-2 days.

4.	 Press the chopped crop in the trench and let it remain one metre above ground 
level.

5.	 Cover it with a layer of 10-15 cm Kadbi straw or wheat turi. Cover with mud and 
finally mud plaster so that silo trench is completely air tight. Alternatively, a plastic 
sheet may be used to cover the packed forage and its edges sealed with clay and 
dung mixture.

6.	 Keep an occasional watch and if there is any crack or hole, plug it immediately. 
Silage will be ready within 45 days.

7.	 Open the silo-pit from one side only and take out 40 kg of silage per animal per day 
for feeding. The remaining silage, kept covered, stays good till used.

8.	 A well preserved material has pH of 4.5 and is low in losses of nitrogen. A good 
quality silage almost retains the nutritional value of original crop and has a high 
lactic acid and a low butyric acid content. 

HAY MAKING
The aim of hay-making is to reduce the moisture content of green fodder to below 

15 per cent so that little or no change in nutritive value occurs during storage. The 
fodder crops having soft stems are suitable for hay-making. In legumes such as 
berseem and lucerne, care should be taken to avoid shattering of leaves during drying. 
Non-legumes such as maize, jowar, bajra are more suitable for silage making than 
for hay making. Harvest the fodder crops at pre-flowering stage. Chop the fodder to a 
length of 5 to 8 cm and spread it in a 10-15 cm thick layer on a hard-surface to dry it in 
the sun. The usual threshing floor can also be used for this purpose.

To speed up the drying process, stir the fodder with a rake after every 2 to 3 hours 
during the day. When thoroughly dried (usually 2-3 days depending on the frequency 
of stirring), collect the dried material for storage. A practical method of determining the 
safe limit of moisture content for storage of dried material is to twist some of the stems. 
If the stem breaks easily, the hay is fit for storage. It can be stored in a room normally 
used for storing wheat bhusa.

A kilogram of dried hay containing 90 per cent dry matter is equivalent to about 6 
kilograms of green fodder containing 15 per cent dry matter.

105



7. SOIL TEST BASED  FERTILIZER 
APPLICATION

Soil testing is a best tool to ensure optimum and balanced use of fertilizers. 
Improper use of fertilizers leads not only to imbalanced nutrition but also deterioration 
of the environment. Soil testing comprises determination of organic carbon content 
and the amount of available nutrients besides, the basic characteristics such as soil 
reaction (pH) and soil salinity (electrical conductivity). Based on the soil test values, the 
soils are categorized as low, medium and high with respect to the status of available 
nutrients as under:

Nitrogen: Organic carbon (OC) content of soil is taken as an index of nitrogen 
(N) availability and thus it is used to make nitrogen fertilizer recommendations. Based 
on organic carbon content soils are categorized as low (less than 0.4% OC), medium 
(0.40-0.75% OC) and high (more than 0.75% OC) in available nitrogen. Soils low in 
organic carbon are poor in supplying nitrogen, therefore, apply 25 % higher dose of 
fertilizer over the dose recommended for soils which are medium in organic carbon 
content. On the other hand, in high organic carbon soils apply 25 % less fertilizer 
as compared to medium soils. Amount of urea required for major rabi crops in low, 
medium and high nitrogen soils is given in Table 1.

Phosphorus: Based on available phosphorus (P) content, soils are rated as low 
(less than 5 kg P per acre), medium (5-9 kg P per acre), high (9-20 kg P per acre) 
and very high (more than 20 kg P per acre). For soils testing low in phosphorus, need 
to apply 25 per cent more fertilizer over the recommended dose, whereas in high P 
soils reduce it by the same amount (Table 1). In soils testing very high in available 
phosphorus, omit phosphorus fertilizer application for 2-3 years and then again get 
the soil tested. However, in maize-wheat cropping system, when soil test phosphorus 
level is more than 16 kg per acre, there is no need to add any phosphorus fertilizer to 
both the crops.

In addition to soil phosphorus status, organic carbon content also influences the 
amount of fertilizer phosphorus required. Therefore, recommended fertilizer dose should 
be adjusted keeping in mind both the soil organic carbon and available phosphorus 
content as shown in Table 2. If the soil organic carbon content is between 0.4 to 0.6 per 
cent, reduce the phosphatic fertilizer dose by one fourth in medium P soils, by one half 
in high P soils and omit its application in very high P soils. If organic carbon content of 
the soil is more than 0.6 per cent and available phosphorus is 5-9 kg per acre, apply 
half the recommended dose of phosphatic fertilizer. However, if the soil phosphorus 
status is more than 9 kg per acre, omit the application of phosphatic fertilizers. In all 
other categories of soil viz. soil with less than 5 kg P per acre irrespective of organic 
carbon content and soils with less than 0.4 per cent organic carbon, irrespective of soil 
P status, apply the recommended dose of phosphatic fertilizer.

106



Table 1. Fertilizer recommendations (kg/acre) for crops grown on different 
fertility category soils

Nutrient Nitrogen Phosphorus
Soil test Low Medium High Low Medium High Very high
category
Fertilizer Urea SSP DAP* SSP DAP * SSP DAP* SSP DAP*

or or or or
Wheat 130 110 90 190 65 155 55 125 45 - -
Barley 65 55 40 100 35 75 25 55 20 - -

(i) Varieties: P 1844, PMH 10, DKC 9108 , PMH 8 and PMH 1

Spring 130 110 90 190 65 155 55 125 45 - -
Maize (ii) Varieties:  PMH 7

95 75 55 95 35 75 27 55 20 - -
Toria 65 55 40 65 25 50 20 35 15 - -
Raya and 
Gobhi 110 90 70 100 35 75 25 60 20 - -
Sarson
Sugarcane 
(Plant 165 130 100 75 25 - - - - - -
Crop)
Sugarcane 
(ratoon 250 195 150 75 25 - - - - - -
crop)

Sugarcane 
(Autumn) 250 195 150 75 25 - - - - - -

* For each kg of DAP applied, reduce the amount of urea by 0.4 kg.

Table 2. Recommendations for fertilizer phosphorus based on available 
phosphorus and organic carbon content in soils

Soil Soil category for phosphorus
organic
carbon

(%) Low Medium High Very high 
(below 5 kg/acre) (5-9 kg/acre) (9-20 kg/acre) (above 20 kg/

acre)
Below 0.4 25% more than Recommended* 25% less than Nil

recommended recommended
0.4-0.6 25% more than 25% less than 50% less than Nil

recommended recommended recommended
Above 0.6 25% more than 50% less than Nil Nil

recommended recommended
*   Fertilizer dose for medium fertility soils as given in Table 1

107



Potassium:The soils are broadly divided into two categories viz. deficient (less than 
55 kg K2O/acre) and sufficient (more than 55 kg K2O/acre). Application of potassium 
is recommended only in soils deficient in potassium. Since the farmers mostly omit 
potassium application, it is important that soil testing for potassium must be done so 
that its deficiency does not limit crop yields. Soils in Gurdaspur, Hoshiarpur, Shaheed 
Bhagat Singh Nagar, Jalandhar and Ropar districts generally show K deficiency.

Micronutrients: With the intensification of agriculture, cultivation of fertilizer 
responsive high yielding varieties and the use of high analysis NPK fertilizers, 
micronutrient deficiencies are becoming yield limiting factors in many crops. 
Deficiencies of zinc, iron and manganese have been noticed in our state. The Punjab 
Agricultural University, Ludhiana is now providing soil test for micronutriests also. The 
soils are categorized as deficient or adequate in respect of different micronutrients 
based on their  critical  values.

In zinc-deficient soils (zinc content less than 0.6 kg/acre), soil application of 10-25 
kg zinc sulphate (21%) per acre is recommended depending on the crop in question. 
In a cropping sequence, the application of zinc sulphate should preferably be made to 
kharif crop for getting maximum benefit.

Manganese deficiency generally appears in wheat or berseem following rice in 
sandy soils. In manganese deficient soils (manganese content below 3.5 kg/acre), 
spray the wheat crop with 0.5% manganese sulphate solution 2-4 days prior to first 
irrigation followed by 3 subsequent sprays at weekly interval. In berseem, where the 
deficiency is noticed, spray the crop 2 or 3 times with 0.5% manganese sulphate 
solution at weekly interval starting from 2 weeks after 1st cutting.

Salt affected soils: Apart from the nutrient content, the soil texture, its reaction,and 
degree of salinity or alkalinity also influence the efficiency of applied fertilizers.

For proper reclamation of the alkali (sodic) soils (pH more than 9.3), gypsum 
application must be accompanied with other management practices. In these soils, it 
is recommended to apply 25 per cent higher fertilizer nitrogen over that for the normal 
soils. Crops grown on alkali soils generally show zinc deficiency and require application 
of zinc sulphate at rates higher than those recommended for normal soils.

Saline soils (electrical conductivity more than 0.8 millimhos/cm) require 25 per cent 
extra fertilizer nitrogen. In these soils, addition of organic manures/green manures/
crop residues is beneficial. Farmers are advised not to apply gypsum to saline soils.
Collection of soil sample

For making fertilizer recommendations in field crops: Scrap away surface litter 
and make a V-shaped cut with a spade or a khurpa to a depth of 6 inches. Remove 
about 1” thick uniform slice of soil from one side of the cut. Similarly, collect samples 
from 7 to 8 places in the field of uniform texture and uniform fertility. Put the samples 
in a clean bucket, tray or cloth and mix it thoroughly. Take approximately half kg of soil 
in a cloth bag and label it with information such as field number, name of the farmer, 
address, date of sampling etc. The soil samples are usually collected from fallow fields 
after the harvest of crops. However, except for rice, soil samples in other crops can 
also be taken during the standing crops from the area between the rows.

108



For kallar reclamation: Dig three feet deep pit with one side vertically straight 
and the other slanting. From the vertically straight side, remove with the help of khurpa 
about 1” thick soil layer to collect about half kg soil from 0-6, 6-12, 12-24 and 24-36 
inch depth. Put the soil samples collected from each depth in a separate clean cloth 
bag and label with the information such as field number, depth of sample, name of the 
farmer, address, date of sampling etc.

For orchard plantation: Dig a 6 feet deep pit in the centre of the field with one side-
vertically straight and the other slanting. From the vertically straight side, remove with the 
help of khurpa about 1” thick soil layer to collect about half kg soil from 0-6, 6-12, 12-24, 
24-36, 36-48, 48-60 and 60-72 inch depth. Collect and process samples from different 
depths as described above for kallar reclamation. If there is any concretion layer, sample 
it separately and note down its depth and width.

If the samples are wet, dry them in shade before putting into the cloth bag.
Soil Testing Laboratories

Soil and water samples are tested by the following laboratories in Punjab:
1. 	 Soil Testing Laboratory, Deptt. of Soil Science, Punjab Agricultural University, 

Ludhiana.
2. 	 Soil Testing Laboratory, Regional Station (Punjab Agricultural University), 

Gurdaspur and Bathinda.
3. 	 Soil Testing Laboratory, KVK’s, Amritsar, Bathinda, Faridkot, Ferozepur, Gurdaspur, 

Bahowal (Hoshiarpur),   Langroya (Shaheed Bhagat Singh Nagar), Patiala, 
Ropar, Kheri (Sangrur), Noormahal (Jalandhar), Samrala (Ludhiana), Kapurthala, 
Goneana (Sri Muktsar Sahib), Budhsinghwala (Moga) and Fatehgarh Sahib.

4. 	 MARKFED and the Department of Agriculture and Farmer Welfare, Punjab have 
also established Soil-Testing Laboratories in the state.

109



8.  ORGANIC FARMING
Organic farming prohibits the use of synthetic agro-chemicals and relies on crop 

rotations, crop residues, animal manures, composts, legumes, green manures and on-
farm wastes to maintain the soil productivity and to supply plant nutrients to the crops. 
Disease and insect-pest management is done by using biopesticides.
Basic organic standards
•	 Conversion from chemical to organic farming requires a three year conversion 

period during which all the practices should be organic.
•	 A buffer zone must be created around the organic field to avoid any contamination 

or run off from the adjoining chemical fields.
•	 Seed should be from the organic produce and should not be treated with any 

chemical. Genetically modified (GM) crops are not allowed. The cultural practices 
of organic crops like seed rate, sowing time and spacing may be same as that of 
conventional crops, if otherwise not mentioned.

•	 Herbicides should not be used for weed control and weeds should be managed by 
cultural practices/methods and need based weedings.

•	 Chemical fertilizers, pesticides and growth regulators are prohibited. 
Organic crop production

The best fields should be preferred for organic farming. The yields of organic crops 
are less than the inorganically grown crops during initial 3-4 years but later on they may 
become equal. Organic farming can be practiced in the following cropping systems: 
1. Rice/Basmati Rice-Wheat
Rice/Basmati Rice

Biofertilizers: Make a solution of one packet of Azospirillum biofertilizer in requisite 
amount of water so as to dip the root of nursery seedlings for one acre in this solution 
for 45 minutes and transplant immediately. 

Nutrition: The nutritional requirement of crop can be met by green manuring. 
Grow cowpea or sunnhemp or dhaincha by using a seed rate of 20 kg per acre and 
incorporate about 50 days old crop just before transplanting the rice/basmati. The 
green manure crop can also be sown with no-till drill after harvesting wheat.

Weed Control: The water should be ponded for first 20-25 days. One manual 
weeding can be done as per need.
Insect-Pest Control 

Stem borers: The larvae of these insects bore into the stem and cause damage 
from July-October. The infected young plants show dead-hearts whereas the old 
one produce empty earheads which turn white and stand erect. Use two tricho-cards 
each of Trichogramma japonicum and T. chilonis per acre, each card having 20,000 
parasitized eggs of Corcyra cephalonica, 5-6 times at weekly interval, starting from 30 
days after transplanting. Cut each tricho-card into 20 strips, each having approximately 
1000 parasitized eggs. Staple these strips on the underside of leaves uniformly at 40 

110



spots per acre during evening hours. These tricho-cards are available at the Biocontrol 
Labs, Department of Entomology, PAU Ludhiana and Regional Station, Gurdaspur. 

Spray the crop with 80 mL  neem based bio-pesticide, Ecotin (azadirachtin 5%) or 
1000 mL  or Neem Kavach/Achook (azadirachtin 0.15 %) in 100 litres of water per acre 
at pest initiation stage.

Leaf folder: The Larvae fold the leaves, eat out the green tissue and produce 
whitestreaks. The mechanical control of leaf folder can be done only before flowering 
by passing the 20-30 m long coir/jute rope, forwards and then backwards, both ways 
while touching the crop canopy. While passing the rope, ensure that water must be 
standing in the crop.

Biological control with neem and tricho-cards is same as mentioned for stemborers. 
Planthoppers: These hoppers include whitebacked planthopper and brown 

planthopper. Both nymphs and adults of these pests suck the cell sap particularly from 
the leaf-sheath from July to October. The crop dries up in patches. As the plants dry 
up, the hoppers migrate to the adjoining plants and kill them. In a few days, the area 
of the dry patches enlarges. About one month after transplanting, a few plants in the 
field should be slightly tilted and tapped 2 or 3 times at the base at weekly interval. 
When planthoppers are noticed floating in the water, spray 80 mL  Ecotin (azadirachtin 
5%) or 4 litres PAU Homemade Neem Extract* in 100 litres of water per acre. Prefer 
Ecotin or PAU Homemade Neem Extract at pest initiation stage. Repeat the spray if 
necessary. For better effectiveness, use knapsack sprayer while directing its spray 
towards the base of the plants. If the damage is noticed at hopper burn stage, treat the 
affected spots along with their 3-4 metre periphery immediately as these spots harbor 
high population of the insect.
*Method of preparation is same as given under Wheat chapter at page no. 18.

Grasshoppers: The adults and nymphs of the grasshoppers eat the leaves 
especially in nursery. The biopesticides recommended for the control of planthoppers 
are also effective for grasshoppers.
Wheat

Method of Sowing: Wheat may be sown with any one of the conventional methods 
as given in wheat chapter. Prefer raised bed sowing with bed planter (2 rows on 37.5 
cm wide bed with 30 cm furrow between two beds) for better weed control. 

Seed Inoculation: Inoculate recommended quantity of seed for one acre with 500 
g consortium or 250 g each of Azotobacter and Streptomyces (Azo-S) biofertilizer and 
one litre of water on pucca floor. Let it dry in shade and sow immediately.

Organic Manures: The organic sources like FYM and compost can be used. The 
quantity of the organic sources depends on the nitrogen content of the source and 
the organic matter content of the soil. These organic sources can be applied at the 
rate of 80, 120 and 160 kg N per acre in soils having high, medium and low organic 
matter content, respectively. The above amount of nitrogen can be obtained from the 
8, 12 and 16 tonnes of FYM.  To desi varieties of wheat apply half the doses of organic 
sources in respective soils. The nutritional requirement of 50 kg nitrogen per acre 

111



to wheat can also be supplied through FYM, vermicompost and castor cake, each 
supplying 1/3 of the total nitrogen requirement. Apply 1.7 tonnes per acre FYM (1% N), 
1.1 tonnes per acre vermicompost (1.5% N) and 0.7 tonnes per acre castor cake (2.5% 
N). The quantity of FYM may be increased or decreased depending upon its N content.

Weed Control: Cultural methods recommended for conventional crop can be used 
to control the weeds. The practices like dry soil surface mulch, stale seed  bed, manual 
weeding before first irrigation and uprooting the weeds before they produce seeds can 
be followed to control the weeds. Give hand weedings as per the need.

Insect-Pest Control: There is no serious problem of insect-pests. The natural 
predators (Coccinella septumpunctata) become active on the appearance of the aphid. 
In case aphid infestation exceeds economic threshold level of 5 aphids per earheads 
(recorded from 10 randomly selected ear heads in each of the 4 quarters of one acre 
field), spray 2 litre per acre PAU homemade neem extract* at weekly interval in 80-100 
litres of water per acre using knap sack sprayer. 
*Method of preparation is same as given on page no. 18 under Wheat chapter

For the management of yellow rust of wheat in organic farming spray 20% 
fermented buttermilk (For one acre, dissolve 40 litres of fermented buttermilk in 200 
litres of water) after one month of wheat sowing followed by three more spray after the 
appearance of yellow rust at an interval of ten days on moderately resistant varieties.
2. Maize/Soybean-Wheat 
Maize 

Seed Inoculation: Mix half kg packet of recommended consortium biofertilizer 
with one litre of water and then thoroughly mix it with maize seed on clean pucca floor. 
Let it dry in shade and sow the seed immediately. 

Organic Manures: Incorporate the residues of previous wheat crop in the field. 
Apply well rotten farm yard manure on dry weight basis @ 8 tonnes per acre during 
the first five years and later on reduce it by 50 per cent. The green manure crop like 
sunnhemp/dhaincha should be sown @ 20 kg seed per acre in the third week of April 
or immediatly after harvesting wheat. Incorporate 40 to 45 days old green manure crop 
at 5 to 7 days before sowing the maize.

Weed Control: Give two hoeings about 15 to 30 days after sowing with khurpa/
kasaula/wheel-hoe/triphali/tractor-drawn cultivator or grow one or two rows of fodder 
cowpea in between maize rows and harvest it at 35 to 45 days after sowing, thereafter 
no weed control operation is required. For inter-cropping of cowpea, use 16 kg per 
acre for variety cowpea 88 and 8 kg per acre for variety CL 367. Sow maize and 
cowpea simultaneously.  

Insect-Pest Control: To control maize borer and other insects, apply bio-
insecticides like 120 mL   per acre Neemazal (1%). The maize borer can also be 
managed by using tricho-cards twice having 40,000 eggs of Corcyra parasitized by 
Trichogramma chilonis. Make first release on 10 days old crop and second one week 
after first release. Cut tricho-cards into 40 equal strips and staple them uniformly on 
the underside of the central whorl leaves in evening hours. The tricho-cards should 
not be applied on rainy days.

112



Soybean
Seed Inoculation: Moisten the seed recommended for one acre with minimum 

amount of water and mix throughly one packet of Bradyrhizobium sp. (LSBR 3) with it 
and let it dry in shade. Sow the seed immediately. 

Organic Manures: Incorporate the residues of previous wheat crop in the field. 
Apply well rotten farm yard manure on dry weight basis @ 4 tonnes per acre during the 
first five years of the start of organic farming and later on reduce it by 50 per cent. The 
green manure crop like sunnhemp/dhaincha should be sown @ 20 kg seed per acre in 
the third week of April or immediately after harvesting wheat. Incorporate 40-45 days 
old green manure crop at 5 to 7 days before sowing the soybean.

Weed Control: Apply 24 quintals per acre rice straw mulch at the time of sowing 
and if needed, give one hand weeding to remove the emerged weeds. Paddy straw 
bale shredder cum mulcher can be used for mulching of paddy straw (See Appendix 
III). If paddy straw mulch has not been applied then give need based 2-3 weedings.

Insect-Pest Control: For controlling white fly and other insects, apply bio-
insecticides like 120 mL  per acre Neemazal (1%).
Wheat

Method of Sowing: Wheat may be sown with any one of the conventional methods 
as given in wheat chapter. Prefer raised bed sowing with bed planter (2 rows on 37.5 
cm wide bed with 30 cm furrow between two beds) for better weed control. 

Seed Inoculation: Inoculate recommended quantity of seed for one acre with 500 
g consortium or 250 g each of Azotobacter and Streptomyces (Azo-S) biofertilizer and 
one litre of water on pucca floor. Let it dry in shade and sow immediately.

Organic Manures: Incorporate the residues of previous maize or soybean crop 
in the field. Apply well rotten farm yard manure on dry weight basis @ 8 tonnes per 
acre during the first five years of the start of organic farming and later on reduce it by 
25 per cent. 

Weed Control: Give need based 2-3 weedings. 
Insect-Pest Control: There is no serious problem of insect-pests. The natural 

predators (Coccinella septempunctata) become active on the appearance of the 
aphid. In case aphid infestation exceeds economic threshold level of 5 aphids per 
earheads (recorded from 10 randomly selected ear heads in each of the 4 quarters 
of one acre field), spray 2 litre per acre PAU homemade neem extract* at weekly 
interval in 80-100 litres of water per acre using knap sack sprayer. 
*Method of preparation is same as given under wheat chapter

For the management of yellow rust of wheat in organic farming spray 20% 
fermented buttermilk (For one acre, dissolve 40 litres of fermented buttermilk in 200 
litres of water) after one month of wheat sowing followed by three more spray after the 
appearance of yellow rust at an interval of ten days on moderately resistant varieties.
3. Maize-Potato-Onion

This cropping system enables to harvest the comparable yield with the chemical 

113



farming in the very first year if potato is intercropped with radish and onion with 
coriander. Sow maize in 1st fortnight of June, potato in the 1st fortnight of October and 
transplant onion in the 1st fortnight of January. 
Maize

Seed Inoculation: Inoculate the seed as given under maize/soybean-wheat 
system in this chapter.

Organic Manures: The nutritional requirement of 50 kg nitrogen per acre to maize 
can be supplied through 1.7 tonnes FYM (1% N) + 1.1 tonnes vermicompost (1.5% N) 
+ 0.7 tonnes castor cake (2.5% N).

Weeds and Insect-Pest Control: Control pests as given under maize/soybean-
wheat system in this chapter.
Potato

Biofertilizers: Apply consortium biofertilizer @ 4 kg per acre as soil application at 
planting. 

Organic Manures: The nutritional requirement of 75 kg nitrogen per acre to potato 
can be supplied through 2.5 tonnes FYM (1% N) + 1.7 tonnes vermicompost (1.5% N) 
+ 1.0 tonnes castor cake (2.5% N). 

Weed Control: Give need based mechanical or manual weedings.
Intercropping: Radish can be intercropped in potato in the first fortnight of October 

on the southern side of each potato ridge and can be dugout in December after 50-70 
days after sowing.
Onion

Biofertilizers: Apply consortium biofertilizer @ 4 kg per acre as soil application at 
the time of transplanting or mix two packets (0.5 kg each) of biofertilizer (Azotobacter 
sp. + Sphingobacterium sp. + Burkholderia sp.) in 80-100 litres of water. Dip the roots 
of rabi onion seedlings for one acre in this mixture for 30 minutes and transplant 
immediately.

Organic Manures: The nutritional requirement of 40 kg nitrogen per acre to onion 
can be supplied through 1.3 tonnes FYM (1% N) + 0.9 tonnes vermicompost (1.5% N) 
+ 0.5 tonnes castor cake (2.5% N).  

Intercropping: Coriander can be intercropped in transplanted onion by sowing one row 
of coriander after every five rows of onion in the first fortnight of January and can be harvested 
as green coriander 40 days after sowing and as seed crop in the second week of May.
4. Maize-Potato-Summer Moong
Maize

Seed Inoculation: Inoculate the seed as given under maize/soybean-wheat 
system in this chapter.

Organic Manures: The nutritional requirement of 50 kg nitrogen per acre of maize 
can be met through 5.0 tonnes dry FYM (1% N) or 3.3 tonnes dry FYM and 1.1 tonnes 
vermicompost (1.5% N).

114



Weeds and Insect-Pest Control: Control pests as given under maize/soybean-
wheat system in this chapter.
Potato

Biofertilizers: Apply consortium biofertilizer @ 4 kg per acre as soil application at 
the time of planting. 

Organic Manures: The nutritional requirement of 75 kg nitrogen per acre of potato 
can be met through 7.5 tonnes dry FYM (1% N) or 5.0 tonnes dry FYM and 1.7 tonnes 
vermicompost (1.5% N).

Weed Control: Give need based mechanical or manual weedings.  
Summer moong

Seed Inoculation: Inoculate the seed with single packet of consortium biofertilizer 
(Rhizobium sp. LSMR-1 and Rhizobacterium RB-3) at the time of sowing. Moisten the 
seed using one packet per acre with about 300 mL  of water. Mix the seed thoroughly 
with culture and let it dry in the shade. Sow the seed within one hour of application of 
biofertilizer. 

Organic Manures: The nutritional requirement of 5 kg nitrogen per acre of summer 
moong can be met through 0.5 tonnes dry FYM (1% N) or 0.3 tonnes dry FYM and 0.1 
tonnes vermicompost (1.5% N).

Weed Control: Give need based manual weedings.
5. Maize-Durum Wheat-Cowpea (fodder)
Maize

Seed Inoculation: Inoculate the seed as given under maize/soybean-wheat 
system in this chapter.

Organic Manures: The nutritional requirement of 50 kg nitrogen per acre to maize 
can be supplied through FYM, vermicompost and castor cake each supplying 1/3 of 
the total nitrogen requirement. Apply 1.7 tonnes per acre FYM (1% N) + 1.1 tonnes per 
acre vermicompost (1.5% N) + 0.7 tonnes per acre castor cake (2.5% N).

Weeds and Insect-pest Control: Control pests as given under maize/soybean-
wheat system in this chapter.
Durum wheat 

Seed Inoculation: Inoculate recommended quantity of seed for one acre with 500 
g consortium or 250 g each of Azotobacter and Streptomyces (Azo-S) biofertilizer and 
one litre of water on pucca floor. Let it dry in shade and sow immediately.

Organic Manures: The nutritional requirement of 50 kg nitrogen per acre to durum 
wheat can be supplied through FYM, vermicompost and castor cake each supplying 
1/3 of the total nitrogen requirement. Apply 1.7 tonnes per acre FYM (1% N) + 1.1 
tonnes per acre vermicompost (1.5% N) + 0.7 tonnes per acre castor cake (2.5% N).

Weed Control: Integrated cultural practices should be adopted to reduce 
the incidence of weeds and the emerged weeds should be removed manually or 
mechanically twice or thrice depending upon the weed intensity.

115



Cowpea Fodder 
Organic Manures: There is no need to apply any nutritional input to the cowpea 

fodder in this system as it grows well on the residual fertility of soil. 
6. Turmeric-Onion
Turmeric

Biofertilizers: Apply consortium biofertilizer @ 4 kg per acre as soil application at 
the time of planting. 

Organic Manures: The nutrition requirement of turmeric can be met by applying 
6 trolleys of farmyard manure (6 tonnes of fully dried farmyard manure having 1% N) 
per acre. In case of non-availability of required farmyard manure, apply 4 trolleys of 
farmyard manure (4 tonnes of fully dried farmyard manure) supplemented with 1.3 
tonnes of vermicompost (1.5% N). 

Weed  Control: Apply 40 quintals per acre paddy straw mulch at the time of 
planting and if needed, give one hand weeding at 3 months after planting. Paddy straw 
bale shredder cum mulcher can be used for mulching of paddy straw (See Appendix 
III). If straw mulch is not applied then give three hand weedings at 1, 2 and 3 months 
after planting the crop.
Onion 

Biofertilizers: Apply consortium biofertilizer @ 4 kg per acre as soil application at 
the time of transplanting or mix two packets (0.5 kg each) of biofertilizer (Azotobacter 
sp. + Sphingobacterium sp. + Burkholderia sp.) in 80-100 litres of water. Dip the roots 
of rabi onion seedlings for one acre in this mixture for 30 minutes and transplant 
immediately.

Organic Manures: The nutritional requirement of onion can be met by applying 
4 trolleys of farmyard manure (4 tonnes of fully dried farmyard manure having 1% N). 
In case of non availability of required farmyard manure, apply 3 trolleys of farmyard 
manure (2.7 tonnes of fully dried farmyard) supplemented with 0.9 tonnes vermicompost 
(1.5% N). Apply consortium biofertilizer @ 4 kg per acre as soil application at the time 
of transplanting. 

Weed Control: Weeds should be controlled by manual hoeing.
7. Gobhi Sarson

Sowing Method: Use 1.5 kg seed per acre. Sow the crop in rows 67.5 cm 
apart with plant to plant spacing of 10 cm. 

Organic Manures: Farm yard manure @ 6 t/acre should be applied on loamy 
sand soil when crop is sown under organic farming practices. The quantity of FYM 
may be increased or decreased depending upon its N content.

Biofertilizer application: Moisten the recommended quantity of gobhi sarson 
seeds for one acre using minimum amount (50-100 ml) of water and apply 250 g of 
biofertilizer (Bacillus sp.) on pucca floor/polyethylene sheet. Dry the treated seeds 
in shade and sow immediately. Seed inoculation with this biofertilizer increases 
seed and oil yield. This bio-fertilizer is available in the Punjab Agricultural University, 

116



Ludhiana Seed Shop at Gate No. 1 and Krishi Vigyan Kendra/Farm Advisory 
Service Centres in different districts.

Weed Control: Weeds can be managed by mechanical weeding with tractor 
or power weeder at 25 and 45 days after sowing. The escaped weeds, if any, can 
be removed by hand weeding.

Mustard aphid (Lipaphis erysimi): Cold and cloudy weather is very favourable 
for the development of mustard aphid. The green plant lice become innumerable, 
covering the inflorescence and siliquae. They suck the plant sap in huge quantities 
and as a result, the plants remain stunted, siliquae shrivel up and seeds do not 
develop. The following integrated pest management programme is recommended 
for its effective control under organic farming conditions: 
i.	 Sow the crop at recommended time preferably up to 3rd week of October 
ii.	 Apply recommended dose of organic manures 
iii.	 Spray any of the following  biopesticides using 80-125 litres of water per acre at 

initiation of aphid attack, and repeat application at weekly interval, if required
Homemade neem extract 	 - 4 litres
Modified Brahmastra 		  - 4 litres  

Preparation: 
a)	 Homemade neem extract: Boil 4.0 kg terminal parts of the shoots of neem 

trees including leaves, green branches and fruits in 10 litres of water for 30 minutes. 
Then, filter this material through muslin cloth and use the filtrate for spraying at the 
recommended dose.

b) Modified Brahmastra:  Put 2 kg leaves of guava, papaya, karanj and castor 
each, and 5 kg leaves of neem after grinding (paste form with little bit water) into 
10 litres of dairy cattle urine. Boil the extract for 30 mintues and keep under shade 
for 48 hours followed by filtration. Use the filtrate as per recommended dose. This 
extract can be stored up to 5 months.     
8. Kharif moong-Wheat-Summer moong
Kharif moong

Seed Inoculation: Moisten the seed recommended for one acre with minimum 
amount of water and mix it thoroughly with one packet of recommended Rhizobium 
culture and let it dry in shade. Sow the seed immediately.

Organic Manures: Apply 1.1 tonnes per acre farmyard manure (1.0% N) on 
dry weight basis at the time of sowing. 

Weed Control: Give need based hand weedings.
Insect-Pest Control: If needed, neem based biopesticides may be used to 

control insect-pests.
Wheat

Method of Sowing: Wheat may be sown with any one of the conventional methods 
as given in wheat chapter of Rabi package, 2024-25. Prefer raised bed sowing with 
bed planter (2 rows on 37.5 cm wide bed with 30 cm furrow between two beds) for 
better weed control. 

117



Seed Inoculation: Inoculate recommended seed for one acre with 500 g 
consortium or 250 g each of Azotobacter and Streptomyces (Azo-S) biofertilizer and 
one litre of water on pucca floor. Let it dry in shade and sow immediately. 

Organic Manures: Apply 5 tonnes per acre well decomposed farmyard manure 
on dry weight basis at the time of sowing. 

Weed Control: Give need based 2-3 weedings.
Insect-Pest Control: The natural predators (Coccinella septempunctata) become 

active on appearance of the aphids. In case of aphid infestation, spray 2 litre per acre 
PAU homemade neem extract* at weekly interval in 80-100 litres of water using knap 
sack sprayer. 
*Method of preparation is same as given under wheat chapter.

For the management of yellow rust of wheat in organic farming spray 20% 
fermented buttermilk (For one acre, dissolve 40 litres of fermented buttermilk in 200 
litres of water) after one month of wheat sowing followed by three more spray after the 
appearance of yellow rust at an interval of ten days on moderately resistant varieties.
Summer Moong

Seed Inoculation: Inoculate the recommended seed for one acre with single 
packet of consortium biofertilizer (Rhizobium sp. LSMR-1 and Rhizobacterium RB-3) 
at the time of sowing. Moisten the seed with about 300 mL  of water and mix thoroughly 
with culture and let it dry in the shade. Sow the seed within one hour of application of 
biofertilizer. 

Organic Manures: Apply 0.5 tonnes per acre farmyard manure (1.0% N) on dry 
weight basis at the time of sowing. 

Weed Control: Give need based hand weedings.
9. Okra-Radish-Pea
Okra

Organic Manures: Apply 3.6 tonnes farm yard manure per acre (1.0 % N) on dry 
weight basis at the time of sowing. 

Mulching: Immediately after sowing, apply 3.6 tonnes per acre paddy straw mulch. 
Weed Control: Use of mulch effectively manages weeds. Escaped weeds, if any, 

can be removed by hand weeding.
Insect-Pest Control: If needed, neem based biopesticides may be used to control 

insect-pests. For the management of jassid and whitefly, spray 80 mL   Ecotin 5% 
(neem-based insecticide) or 2.0 litre PAU Homemade Neem Extract*. Method of 
preparation of neem extract is same as given earlier.
Radish 

Organic Manures: Apply 2.5 tonnes farm yard manure per acre (1.0% N) on dry 
weight basis at the time of sowing. 

Mulching: Apply 3.2 tonnes per acre paddy straw mulch immediately after sowing. 
Weed Control: Use of mulch effectively manages weeds. Escaped weeds, if any, 

can be removed by hand weeding.

118



Insect-Pest Control: If needed, neem based biopesticides may be used to control 
insect-pests.
Pea

Seed Inoculation: Treat the seed with bacterial culture (Rhizobium leguminosarum). 
One acre culture packet should be mixed with half litre of water. Rub the mixture 
thoroughly on seed to give a fine covering of the culture to every seed. Thereafter, 
spread the seed in shade for drying and sow it immediately afterwards. 

Seed Treatment: Treat the seed with 15 g Talc based formulation of Pseudomonas 
fluorescens per kg seed before sowing to control wilt, root rot and collar rot (Fusarium 
oxysporum and Rhizoctonia solani) diseases. 

Organic Manures: Apply 2.0 tonnes farm yard manure per acre (1.0% N) on dry 
weight basis at the time of sowing. 

Mulching: Immediately after sowing, apply 4.0 tonnes per acre of paddy straw 
mulch. Paddy straw bale shredder cum mulcher can be used for mulching of paddy 
straw (See Appendix III). 

Weed Control: Use of mulch effectively manages weeds. Escaped weeds, if any, 
can be removed by hand weeding.

Insect-Pest Control: If needed, neem based biopesticides may be used to control 
insect-pests. 
10. Brinjal-Pea
Brinjal 

Organic manures: Apply 5 tonnes farmyard manure per acre (1.0% N on dry 
weight basis) at the time of seed bed preparation. The quantity of FYM may be 
increased or decreased depending upon its N content.

Weed management: Apply 4.8 tonnes per acre paddy straw mulch immediately 
after transplanting. Use of mulch effectively manages weeds. Paddy straw bale 
shredder cum mulcher can be used for mulching of paddy straw (see Appendix III). 
The escaped weeds, if any, can be removed by hand weeding. 

Insect-pest management: For management of whitefly, spray 1200 mL   PAU 
Neem Extract* or 1500 mL  maize/sorghum/bajra juice per acre.

*Method of preparation: Boil 4.0 kg terminal parts of the shoots of neem trees 
including leaves, green branches and fruits in 10 liters of water for 30 minutes. 
Then filter this material through muslin cloth and use the filtrate for spraying at the 
recommended dose.
Pea 

Seed treatment: Treat the seed with 15 g Talc based formulation of Pseudomonas 
fluorescens per kg seed before sowing to control wilt, root rot and collar rot (Fusarium 
oxysporum and Rhizoctonia solani) diseases.

Seed inoculation: Treat the seed with bacterial culture (Rhizobium leguminosarum) 
to ensure nodule formation and quick growth. One acre culture packet should be mixed 
with half litre of water. Rub the mixture thoroughly on seed to give a fine covering of 

119



the culture to every seed. Thereafter, spread the seed in shade for drying and sow it 
immediately afterwards.

Organic manures: Apply 2 tonnes farmyard manure per acre (1.0% N on dry 
weight basis) at the time of seed bed preparation. The quantity of FYM may be 
increased or decreased depending upon its N content.

Weed management: Apply 4 tonnes per acre paddy straw mulch immediately 
after sowing. Use of mulch effectively manages weeds. The escaped weeds, if any, 
can be removed by hand weeding.

Insect-pest management: If needed, neem based biopesticides may be used to 
control insect-pests.
11. Maize-Pea-Summer moong
Maize

Seed Inoculation: Mix half kg packet of recommended consortium bio-fertilizer 
with one litre of water and then thoroughly mix it with maize seed on clean pucca floor. 
Let it dry in shade and sow the seed immediately. 

Organic Manures: The nutritional requirement of 50 kg nitrogen per acre to maize 
can be supplied through 1.7 tonnes FYM (1% N) + 1.1 tonnes vermicompost (1.5% N) 
+ 0.7 tonnes castor cake (2.5% N). 

Weeds and Insect-Pest Control: Control pests as given under maize/soybean-
wheat system in this chapter.
Pea

Seed inoculation: Treat the seed of one acre with half kg packet having consortium 
of three bacterial cultures (Rhizobium leguminosarum + PSB+ PGPR) to ensure nodule 
formation and quick growth. Rub the mixture thoroughly on seed to give a fine covering 
of the culture to every seed. Thereafter, spread the seed in shade for drying and sow 
it immediately afterwards.

Seed Treatment: Treat the seed with 15 g Talc based formulation of Pseudomonas 
fluorescens per kg seed before sowing to control wilt, root rot and collar rot (Fusarium 
oxysporum and Rhizoctonia solani) diseases.

Organic Manures: Apply 2.0 tonnes farm yard manure per acre (1.0% N) on dry 
weight basis at the time of sowing. The nutritional requirement of 20 kg nitrogen per 
acre to pea can also be met through 0.7 tonnes FYM (1% N), 0.44 tonnes vermicompost 
(1.5% N) and 0.28 tonnes castor cake (2.5% N) each supplying 1/3 of the total nitrogen 
requirement.

Mulching: Immediately after sowing, apply 4.0 tonnes per acre of paddy straw 
mulch. Paddy straw bale shredder cum mulcher can be used for mulching of paddy 
straw (See Appendix III).

Weed Control: Use of mulch effectively manages weeds. Escaped weeds, if any, 
can be removed by hand weeding.

Insect-Pest Control: If needed, neem based biopesticides may be used to control 
insect-pests. 

120



Summer Moong
Seed Inoculation: Inoculate the seed with single packet of consortium biofertilizer 

(Rhizobium sp. LSMR-1 and Rhizobacterium RB-3) at the time of sowing. Moisten the 
seed using one packet per acre with about 300 mL  of water. Mix the seed thoroughly 
with culture and let it dry in the shade. Sow the seed within one hour of application of 
biofertilizer. 

Organic Manures: The nutritional requirement of 5 kg nitrogen per acre of summer 
moong can be met through 0.5 tonnes dry FYM (1% N) or 0.3 tonnes dry FYM and 0.1 
tonnes vermicompost (1.5% N). The nutritional requirement of 5 kg nitrogen per acre 
of summer moong can also be met through through 0.17 tonnes FYM (1% N), 0.11 
tonnes vermicompost (1.5% N) and 0.07 tonnes castor cake (2.5% N) each supplying 
1/3 of the total nitrogen requirement.

Weed Control: Give need based manual weedings.
12. Mentha (Pudina) 

Seed Rate: About 2 quintals of freshly dug 5-8 cm long suckers are enough for 
one acre. This quantity can be had from half kanal (10 marla) of mentha. 

Bio-fertilizers: Apply consortium bio-fertilizer @ 4 kg per acre as soil application 
before planting along with recommended fertilizer.

Organic Manures: Mentha responds favourably to organic manuring. Apply 6 
tonnes FYM per acre (1.0 % N) on dry weight basis before planting. The quantity of 
FYM can be increased or decreased depending upon its N content.

Weed Control: To obtain good yield and high-quality oil, the crop should be kept 
free from weeds at all the stages of growth. For higher yield, apply paddy straw mulch 
@ 24 quintals per acre. Paddy straw bale shredder cum mulcher can be used for 
mulching of paddy straw (See Appendix III).

Irrigation: Mentha requires frequent but light irrigations. Irrigate at 10 days interval 
till the end of March and at five or six days interval till the onset of the monsoon. During 
the rainy season, irrigate according to the need.
13. Organic Fodder Production 

The production technology for organic fodders is similar to that of conventional 
fodder crops except that chemical fertilizers, herbicides, insecticides and fungicides 
are not to be used on organic crops. The quantity of farmyard manure may be adjusted 
as per the nitrogen content of the farmyard manure.
Maize-Berseem-Bajra: Apply 3.5 tonnes of dry farmyard manure (1% N) per acre and 
sow maize in 2nd week of August. Harvest it after 50-60 days after sowing between milk 
ripe and dough stage of grain development. Then apply 1.0 tonnes of dry farmyard 
manure and sow berseem in the 2nd week of October which gives 4-5 cuttings. After 
berseem harvesting, apply 2.0 tonnes of dry farmyard manure and sow bajra in the 2nd 
week of June. Harvest it after 45-55 days after sowing at the ear initiation stage. 
Maize-Berseem-Maize+Cowpea: Apply 3.5 tonne of dry farmyard manure (1%N) per 
acre and sow maize in 2nd week of August. Harvest it after 50-60 days after sowing 

121



between milk ripe and dough stage of grain development. Then apply 1.0 tonne of 
dry farmyard manure and sow berseem in the 2nd week of October which gives 4-5 
cuttings. After berseem harvesting, apply 3.5 tonnes of dry farmyard manure and sow 
maize+cowpea mixture in 2nd week of June by using 15 kg seed of maize and 15 kg of 
Cowpea 88 variety or 6 kg of CL 367. Harvest the mixture after 50-60 days after sowing 
at milk ripe to dough stage of grain development in maize. 
Management of Maize Borer: The maize borer can be controlled by using tricho-
cards twice having 50,000 eggs of Corcyra cephalonica per acre parasitized by 
Trichogramma chilonis; first release on 10 days old crop and second one week 
after first release. Cut tricho-cards into 50 strips, each having approximately 1000 
parasitized eggs. Place these strips in the central whorl uniformly at 50 spots per 
acre during evening hours. These tricho-cards are available at the Biocontrol Labs, 
Department of Entomology, PAU Ludhiana and Regional Station, Gurdaspur.
Note: The bio-fertilizer cultures are available with the PAU Seed Shop at Gate No. 1, Krishi 
Vigyan Kendras and Farm Advisory Service Centres in different districts.
 

Certification of Organic Produce 
The Government of India has formulated organic standards for certified organic 

production and accredited inspection and certification agencies to certify organic 
farms based on these organic standards. The farmers who want to get their farms 
certified as organic can contact these agencies. The addresses of these inspection 
and certification agencies can be had from the APEDA website www.apeda.gov.in

Method of Preparing Phospho-compost
Collect rice-straw from fields and bring it  to the composting site near the tubewell on 

the farm to have easy water availability. It can be made into bundles of convenient size 
(about 10-15 kilograms). Prepare large quantity of a “soaking solution” by thoroughly 
mixing one kg cow dung for every 1000 litre of water in a big tank. (The volume of the 
tank can be calculated by measuring Length x Breadth x Height of the tank in metres. 
One cubic metre is equal to 1000 Litres of water). Dip the bundles one by one into the 
“soaking solution” for 2-3 minutes.

Drain the excess solution by placing the bundles on a slope lined with a plastic 
sheet. The drip should be collected and recycled into the tank again. Make 15 cm 
raised beds 5 metre long and 1.5 metre wide on the ground. This will help in assessing 
the exact watering of the heap later. Draining of water out of bed is a visual indication 
of excess watering.

Take the wet rice-straw to the location of the compost heap. Line the bed with 
2-6 centimetre diameter tree branches/sticks. This helps in aeration in the heaped 
rice-straw. The wet rice straw will generally have 70 per cent moisture. Place the wet 
rice straw on the beds uniformly until 500 kilograms has been stacked. Powdered low-
grade rock phosphate (low grade rock phosphate can be had from Rajasthan State 
Mines and Minerals Ltd 4, Meera Marg, Udaipur 313004) should be mixed @ 6 per cent 
on dry weight basis of the rice straw approximately. For 500 kilogram of the rice straw, 

122



30 kg of the rock phosphate should be sprinkled uniformly while making the heap after 
wetting. This will give approximately 1% phosphorus in the final decomposed product. 
The height of 500 kg rice-straw stack is 1.5 metre approximately. Any quantity of rice-
straw can be composted in multiple heaps of 500 kg at one time leaving a passage of 
1.0 metre between the beds.

Cover the heap with a 20-30 centimetre thick layer of unsoaked rice-straw. This will 
minimize water loss while providing the necessary aeration. The major key to success 
is the ability to maintain about 70 per cent moisture in the heap. Any major error in 
this step will delay composting. Water the heaps using watering lance with the help 
of Tullu Pump. (Note: watering heaps with sprinklers does not work because water 
generally runs down the sides, instead of going inside the heap. Ensure that the water 
penetrates the heap by using a lance with a sharp point to pierce the heap of rice-
straw. Pierce the lance deepest possible with an aim to water uniformly). Composting 
can be terminated after 80-90 days by which time it is ready for processing or for field 
application. By this time its carbon and nitrogen ratio changes to 15:1. At this stage, 
strands of the rice straw are weak and twisting can readily break a hand-full of it.
Method for preparation of Vermicompost from paddy straw/ waste maize 
silage
1.	 For making vermicompost, cemented beds of dimensions 6’ (length)×3’ (breadth)×2’ 

(height) should be constructed on leveled ground. The length of the bed may vary 
depending upon the space and resources. 

2.	 The floor of the bed must be pucca floor to avoid seepage of vermin wash, faeces 
and urine of earthworms.

3.	 Firstly, lay the beds with one feet layer of paddy straw (chopped/unchopped)/waste 
maize silage. Paddy straw/waste maize silage is well moistened by sprinkling 
water to maintain moisture up to 60-70%.

4.	 Then second layer of 4-5 days old animal dung is applied up to 2 feet depth.
5.	 Introduce one kg earthworms of species (Eisenia foetida) per 6 feet length. The 

quantity of worms may vary if the bed size varied from standard dimensions. 
6.	 Two inch layer of soaked paddy straw is applied on the beds to avoid water loss 

through evaporation. 
7.	 Turning after every week is required to maintain aeration for earthworms and 

decomposition of paddy straw.
8.	 Water spray is applied two times a day in summer and 2-3 days interval in winter.
9.	 Vermicompost will be ready after 60-70 days and 45 days of composting of paddy 

straw and waste maize silage, respectively. 
Precautions: 
1.	 Fresh animal dung should be avoided as it has high temperature and high amount 

of gases which can be harmful to the earthworms.
2.	 The bed must be kept under the shed to protect the earthworms from direct 

sunlight, heat, cold and heavy rains. 
3.	  The moisture in the beds must be 60-70%. 

123



NATURAL FARMING
Natural farming is a chemical-free, agro-ecological farming system that integrates 

crops, trees and livestock to optimize biodiversity and promote ecological processes. 
It emphasizes using on-farm resources, indigenous practices and local knowledge to 
minimize external inputs and enhance soil health and fertility. It is largely based on 
on-farm biomass recycling with major stress on biomass mulching, use of on-farm 
cow dung-urine formulations; maintaining soil aeration and exclusion of all synthetic 
chemical inputs. 
Key Principles of Natural Farming
1.	 Avoids use of chemical fertilizers, herbicides, or pesticides.
2.	 Uses natural formulations like beejamrit, ghanjeevamrit and jeevamrit from cow 

dung, cow urine, jaggery and pulse flour.
3.	 Mulching: Covers soil with crop residues, dried leaves, or green biomass to retain 

moisture, regulate temperature and improve fertility.
4.	 Crop Diversity and Rotation: Encourages intercropping, crop rotation and mixed 

cropping to maintain soil health and pest control.
5.	 Promoting Soil Biology: focuses on feeding the soil microflora instead of feeding 

the plant directly.
6.	 Self-reliance and Low Input Cost: Prepare all required inputs on the farm itself, 

significantly reducing cultivation costs.
Crop production under Natural Farming Practices

Natural Farming is best initiated on fertile and well-manured fields to ensure 
successful establishment. In the initial 4-5 years, crop yields under Natural Farming 
may be lower compared to those from conventional inorganic farming. However, 
with sustained practices, yields often stabilize and can eventually match those of 
conventional systems.
1. Maize-Potato-Summer Moong

In this cropping system, kharif maize and potato are cultivated using recommended 
organic practices, while summer moong is grown under Natural Farming practices. 
Summer Moong

For seed treatment, soak the quantity of seed required for one acre in beejamrit 
for 30 minutes, then dry it in the shade before sowing. For nutrition, incorporate 4 
quintals of ghanjeevamrit per acre into the soil two days prior to sowing. Additionally, 
apply jeevamrit at 200 litres per acre along with each irrigation. To manage weeds 
and conserve soil moisture, apply paddy straw mulch at 15-20 quintals per acre 
immediately after sowing. 
Method of preparation of NF concoctions
i.	 Beejamrit: To prepare beejamrit, 5 kg of fresh dung from an indigenous cow is tied 

in a cloth and hung in a drum containing 20 litres of water for 12 hours. Afterward, 
the dung is squeezed into the water three times to extract the material. A handful 
of soil from under the tree/undisturbed/unused/forest land is added to the extract 
and mixed thoroughly. Then, 50 g of lime solution (prepared by dissolving 50 g of 

124



lime in one litre of water) and 5 litres of cow urine are added to the drum and stirred 
well. Beejamrit is now ready for seed treatment and is used @ 20 litres per 100 kg 
seed.

ii.	 Jeevamrit: To prepare jeevamrit, 10 kg of fresh dung from an indigenous cow, 10 
litres of cow urine, 2 kg of jaggery, 2 kg of gram flour and a handful of virgin soil are 
mixed in a 250-litre plastic drum. Then, 200 litres of water is added to the mixture 
and stirred well using a wooden stick. The drum is kept under shade and covered 
with a gunny bag. In summer, the mixture is allowed to ferment for 3 days and 
in winter, for 7-8 days. It is stirred twice (morning & evening) daily in a clockwise 
direction. Use jeevamrit within two days of its preparation.

iii.	 Ghanjeevamrit: To prepare ghanjeevamrit, 100 kg of indigenous cow dung is air-
dried for 4-5 days. The dried dung is then mixed with 1 kg of jaggery, 1 kg of pulse 
flour, 3 litres of cow urine and 250 grams of virgin soil. The mixture is blended 
thoroughly and stored in a shaded area for 10 days. After the fermentation period, 
ghanjeevamrit is ready for field application.

125



9. MULTIPLE CROPPING

 Multiple cropping is a system in which more than two crops are grown one after 
the other on the same piece of land in quick succession during a year. The success 
of this system depends upon the selection of suitable crops/varieties, availability of 
labour, farm machinery, irrigation, fertilizers, pesticides, finance, etc. in addition to the 
required technical know-how. Timely cultural operations, alertness and managerial 
capability of the farmer are highly critical factors in the success of multiple cropping. 
The objective is to grow one or two additional crops in between the main season crops. 
This can be made possible through selection of short duration high yielding varieties, 
older nursery seedlings under delayed rice transplanting, adoption of minimum tillage 
and inter-relay cropping and harvesting of wheat and maize by about 5-7 days earlier 
than the dead ripe stage.
Some of the important high intensity rotations for multiple cropping 
systems are:

1. Green manuring (Dhaincha/Cowpea/Sunnhemp)-Rice-Wheat: After 
harvesting wheat apply rauni and sow 20 kg seed per acre of dhaincha (pre-soaked in 
water for about 8 hours) or sunnhemp or 12 kg seed per acre of cowpea upto the end 
of April. Bury 6-7 weeks old dhaincha/sunhemp/cowpea, 1-2 days before transplanting 
of paddy. This will help in saving of about 25 kg N per acre for rice besides maintaining 
the soil health. However, for getting higher productivity of rice, practise green manuring 
and apply recommended dose of nitrogen (50 kg N per acre) in sandy to sandy loam 
soil. Likewise sowing of summer moong immediately after the harvesting of wheat in 
April end, after picking of pods, burying of its stover a day before transplanting of rice 
also helps to increase the paddy yield and in reducing the nitrogen dose of rice by 
one-third.

2. Cowpea/Bajra/Maize (fodder) - Maize/Rice-Wheat: Grow summer fodder crop 
(Cowpea/Bajra/Maize) with recommended seed rate and other practices, immediately 
after the harvest of wheat in the last week of April. These fodder crops will vacate field 
for timely sowing of the succeeding maize/rice crop. These fodder crops provide green 
fodder during the lean period in summer in the months of June. A fodder crop of 45-55 
days old generally provides 80-100 quintals per acre of green fodder.

3.  Green manuring-Maize-Wheat:  Sow a green manure crop of dhaincha/
sunhemp/cowpea with recommended practices in the last week of April and burry it 
after 6-8 weeks stage. Allow it to decompose for about 10-12 days before sowing 
maize in the end of June. This practice will help in maintaining the soil fertility. In green 
manured field maize crop does not require any more application of organic manure 
(FYM etc.)

4.  Maize/Rice-Potato-Wheat:  Grow a short duration variety of maize/rice in mid 
of June. The short duration crop varieties shall vacate the field in the mid of September 
for timely sowing of succeeding crop of potato. Sow early maturing varieties of potato 
like Kufri Chandermukhi with recommended practices in the end of September. Harvest 

126



12 weeks old crop of potato and later on sow late sown wheat variety (PBW 752) with 
50% recommended N per acre without P and K application.

5.  Maize/Rice-Potato-Summer Moong: Summer moong sown after wheat is 
liable to caught up in early monsoon rains. For getting successful crop of summer 
moong, it should preferably be sown after seed crop of potato in the second or third 
week of March. In these cropping sequences maize/rice could be planted in mid June 
to vacate the field for timely sowing of potato crop in the second fortnight of September. 
Further, the summer mung after potato do not require any fertilizer application if the 
preceding potato crop received recommended  dose  of  NPK  and  FYM.

6.  Rice-Potato/Toria-Sunflower: Transplant short duration variety of rice (PR 126) 
in mid June. This will vacate the field in mid-September. Potato (Kufri Chandermukhi) 
can be sown in the 3rd week of September and harvested in end of December. 
Alternatively, toria (TL-15) can also be grown after rice. Thereafter sow short duration 
variety of sunflower in the early January on southern slope of East-Westerly drawn 
ridges.  Apply 12 kg N per acre to sunflower after potato, if the potato crop received 
recommended level of NPK alongwith 20 tonnes of FYM per acre. Sunflower crop will 
vacate the field in mid May for timely transplanting of rice.

7. Maize-Potato/Toria-Sunflower: In this cropping system, maize could be sown 
in early June to vacate the field for timely sowing of potato crop in second fortnight of 
September. Potato can be harvested after twelve weeks in end December. Alternatively 
short duration variety of toria (TL-15) can be grown after maize. Thereafter sunflower 
(short duration variety) can be grown successfully in early January southern slope of 
East-Westerly drawn ridges. Apply 12 kg N per acre after potato, if potato crop received 
recommended level of NPK alongwith 20 tonnes of FYM per acre. The sunflower crop 
will vacate the field in mid May for timely sowing of maize.

8. Groundnut-Potato/Toria/Pea/late Kharif fodder-Wheat: In groundnut-wheat 
cropping system, a crop of potato/toria/pea/late kharif maize fodder could be raised 
successfully. For this sow  groundnut (variety SG 99 and M-522) during end of April 
and first week of May after the harvest of wheat. Further, as groundnut, crop vacates 
the field in early September, an additional crop of potato or early Pea (Ageta-6 or Arkel) 
or Toria (TL 15) or late sown maize fodder could be taken during the second fortnight 
of September. Toria/Pea/late sown fodder and potato vacate the field during December 
then the late sown wheat could be sown. Such a groudnut based cropping system has 
been found remunerative.

9.  Maize-Potato-Onion: This cropping system gives highest net returns with 
substantial saving of water and gave almost double the productivity than rice-wheat 
system. For this system sow maize in mid-June, potato (Kufri Chandermukhi) in 
first week of October and onion (Punjab Naroya) from 10-15 January for high yield 
realization. The soil fertility in relation to OC, available N, P and K also improve over 
time.

10.  Groundnut-Potato-Bajra (fodder): This cropping system gives better 
productivity levels than rice-wheat system with sizeable saving of water and also 
ensures improvement in soil fertility. For this system sow groundnut (SG-99, M-522) in 

127



first week of May, potato in first week of October and bajra fodder in the first fortnight 
of March.

11. Basmati Rice-Celery-Bajra (fodder): This cropping system is more 
remunerative and productive than the existing basmati rice-wheat system. Transplant 
basmati rice in mid July which will vacate the field in mid November. Then grow celery 
in December which vacates the field in first fortnight of May and after this grow bajra 
crop for fodder.

12. Basmati Rice-Berseem (fodder and seed): This cropping system provides 
substaintial net returns than the existing basmati rice-wheat system. Transplant 
basmati rice in mid July which will vacate the field in mid November. A successful crop 
of berseem for seed production can be grown in end November after the harvest of 
basmati rice. It provides three cuttings of green fodder before leaving the crop for seed 
production.

13. Maize-Potato-Mentha: This cropping system is doubly profitable than rice-
wheat  system and provides considerable saving of irrigation water. In this system sow 
maize in mid June which will vacate the field in second fortnight of September. Then 
grow potato (Kufri Chandramukhi) in the first week of October which will vacate the 
field in mid January and after this grow mentha crop in the second fortnight of January. 
The soil fertility in relation to OC, available P & K also improves over time.

14. Maize/Rice-Gobhi sarson-Summer Moong: These cropping systems 
produce more yield and economic returns than the maize-wheat and rice-wheat 
systems. Therefore, maize should be sown in the first fortnight of June, rice in second 
fortnight of June, gobhi sarson from 10-30 October and summer moongbean in the first 
fortnight of April. The summer moongbean can be sown without tillage after applying 
pre-sowing irrigation.

15. Rice-Gram-Summer Moong: This cropping system produces more yield 
and economic returns than the rice-wheat system. Therefore, the rice should be 
transplanted in the second fortnight of June, gram should be sown from 25 October 
to 10 November in two lines per bed prepared by wheat bed planter and sow summer 
moongbean in the 2-3 week of  April. This system also improves the soil fertility, soil 
micro flora and fauna over rice-wheat system.

16. Maize/Summer groundnut-Green Onion-Onion: These cropping systems 
produce higher yield and economic returns than the rice-wheat system. The groundnut 
should be sown in the second fortnight of May and maize in the first fortnight of June. 
The bulbs of onion sown in March should be uprooted in the month of June and 
stored in an airy place. These onion bulbs should be sown in the field after uprooting/
harvesting of summer groundnut/maize in second fortnight of September. The green 
onions are uprooted in the second fortnight of December. For rabi onions, nursery 
should be transplanted in the first fortnight of January. These onions are ready for 
harvesting in mid May.

17. Maize-Vegetable pea/Potato-Spring maize: These cropping systems 
produce more yield and economic returns than the rice-wheat system. The maize 
should be sown in the first fort night of June. The vegetable pea/potato can be sown in 

128



the second fortnight of September and spring maize during first fortnight of February. 
Preferably grow spring maize under drip irrigation system.

Apply 2.5 tonnes per acre of crop residue mulch to each crop grown under surface 
and sub surface drip irrigation in kharif maize-potato-spring maize cropping system for 
water saving and higher productivity.

18. DSR-Potato-Mentha/Onion: These cropping systems produce more yield 
and economic returns than the rice-wheat system. Direct seeded rice should be sown 
in the first fortnight of June, potato can be sown in the second fortnight of October, 
mentha in second fortnight of January or onion can be transplanted in second fortnight 
of January. 

19. DSBR-Potato-Mentha: This cropping system produce more yield and economic 
returns than the rice-wheat system. Direct seeded basmati rice should be sown in the 
second fortnight of June, potato can be sown in the first fortnight of November and 
mentha in first fortnight of February.

20. Soybean-Peas-Summer moong: This pulse based cropping system gives 
higher productivity and profitability as compared to rice-wheat system along with the 
improvement in the soil health. Soybean should be sown during first fortnight of June; 
Peas can be sown in the first fortnight of November and summer moong during second 
fortnight of March.

21. Groundnut-Peas-Sunflower: This cropping system gives higher productivity 
and profitability as compared to rice-wheat cropping system along with the improvement 
in the soil health. Groundnut should be sown during second fortnight of May, peas 
can be sown in the second fortnight of October and sunflower during first fortnight of 
February.

22. Spring Groundnut-Maize-Potato/Peas: These systems give higher 
productivity and economic returns than the rice-wheat cropping system along with 
improvement in soil fertility and soil microbial diversity. Spring Groundnut can be sown 
up to first fortnight of March, maize during first fortnight of July and sow potato and 
peas during mid of October. 

23. Spring Groundnut-Moong-Potato/Peas: These systems give higher 
productivity and economic returns than the rice-wheat cropping system along with 
improvement in soil fertility and soil microbial diversity. Spring Groundnut can be sown 
up to first fortnight of March, moong during first fortnight of July and sow potato and 
peas during mid of October.

24. Summer moong-DSR-Wheat cropping system: This cropping system gives 
higher productivity and economic returns than DSR-wheat system. Summer moong 
can be sown in second week of April followed by DSR in the first fortnight of June. 
Incorporation of summer moong residue after picking of pods helps to increase the rice 
yield and also saves nitrogen. This system also improves soil fertility and soil micro 
flora and fauna over DSR-wheat.

25. Maize (Green cobs/fodder) Potato-Onion cropping system: This cropping 
system gives highest net returns with substantial saving of water and higher rice 
equivalent yield than rice-wheat system. For this system sow maize in the last week 

129



of May to end of June and pick green cobs after 55 days of sowing for table purpose 
and green fodder can be used for milch animals, potato (Kufri Pukhraj) in first week of 
October and onion (Punjab Naroya) from 10-15 January for high yield realization. The 
soil fertility in relation to OC, available N, P and K also improve over time.

26. Summer moong-DSBR-Wheat cropping system: This system gives more 
yield and economic returns than the DSBR-wheat cropping system. Summer moong 
can be sown upto 20th April, followed by DSBR in the second fortnight of June and 
wheat in second fortnight of November. Incorporation of summer moong residue after 
picking of pods helps to increase the basmati yield and also saves nitrogen. This 
system also improves soil fertility and soil micro flora and fauna over DSBR-wheat.
Fodder cropping system

27. Maize-Berseem-Bajra: In this cropping system, sow maize in 2nd week of 
August and harvest it after 50-60 days after sowing when the crop is between milkripe 
and dough stage of grain development. Sow berseem in the first or second week of 
October and take 4-5 cuttings. Then sow bajra in second week of June and harvest it 
after 45 to 55 days after sowing at the start of ear initiation stage.

28. Maize-Berseem-Maize+Cowpea: In this cropping system, sow maize   in 
second week of August and harvest it after 50-60 days  after  sowing when  the  crop 
is between milkripe and dough stage of grain development. Sow berseem in the first 
or second week of October and take 4-5 cuttings. Then sow maize+cowpea mixture in 
second week of June and harvest it after 50 to 60 days after sowing when the maize 
crop is between milkripe and dough stage of grain development.

29.	Sorghum multicut-Berseem cropping system: In this cropping system, sow 
multicut forage sorghum hybrid (Punjab Sudax Chari 4) in first week of May in rows 30 
cm apart. The first cutting is ready in 55-65 days after sowing. Subsequently, cuttings 
can be taken after an interval of about 35-40 days. Sow berseem in the first or second 
week of October and take 4-5 cuttings.

SUB SURFACE DRIP IRRIGATION AND FERTIGATION 
30. Maize-Wheat-Summer moong: Place drip inline having dripper having 20 

cm spacing at 20 cm depth with lateral to lateral spacing of 67.5 cm spacing for sub 
surface drip fertigation in maize-wheat-summer moong cropping system. Sow one row 
of maize, two rows of wheat and two rows of summer moong on each drip inline during 
respective season. 

Apply sub surface drip irrigation at 3 days interval for maize and summer moong 
with fertigation of 80 % recommended dose of NPK. In maize, apply 1/5 dose of NPK 
at sowing and fertigate remaining P and K in 5 splits and N in 7 splits at 9 days 
interval starting from 15 DAS. Apply sub surface drip irrigation at 7 days interval up 
to mid February and thereafter at 5 days interval to wheat with fertigation of 80 % 
recommended dose of NPK. 

In wheat, apply 1/5th dose of NPK at sowing and fertigated the remaining NPK in 
8 splits at seven days interval starting from crown root initiation. In summer moong 
fertigated NPK dose in 5 equal splits at 6 days interval starting from 10 DAS. Use 
urea, mono ammonium phosphate and muraite of potash as source of N, P and K, 

130



respectively. If dripper discharge is 2.2 litre per hour, the following schedule should 
be adopted for sub surface drip irrigation in maize-wheat-summer moong cropping 
system:

Crop Month Time of irrigation (Minutes)*
July 35
Aug 35

Maize
Sept 50
Oct 30
Dec 30
Jan 65

Wheat
Feb 70
March 50
May 60

Summer Moong
June 45

If discharge rate is different then time of irrigation may be adjusted proportionally 
by the formula
       = (2.2 x time of irrigation (min)*) ÷  Discharge of dripper (litre per hour)   

In field experiments, sub surface drip irrigation and fertigation resulted in 18.4% 
higher system productivity with saving of 28.5 % applied irrigation water and 20% 
nutrients than control.

31. Zero  till  direct  seeded  rice-Wheat: Place drip line having inline 
emitter with discharge rate of 2 litre per hour having 30 cm spacing at 15 cm 
depth with lateral to lateral spacing of 67.5 cm. Sow rice in dry soil without 
rauni but just after sowing apply irrigation on alternate days up to 21 days for 
proper establishment of the crop. Fertigate with 80 % recommended dose of 
nitrogen in five equal splits starting from 15 days of sowing at 12 days interval. 

Sow the wheat crop without pre sowing irrigation. Fertigate with 80 % recommended 
dose of nitrogen in five equal splits starting from 21 days of sowing at 10 days interval. 
The following schedule should be adopted for rice and wheat crops:

Crop Month Time of irrigation (Minutes)* Interval (days)
Rice June 65 2

July 65 2
August 65 2
September 65 2
October 65 2

131



Wheat November 45 21
December 45 10
January 45 10
February 45 7
March 45 5
April 45 5

If the discharge rate is different, then time of irrigation may be adjusted proportionally 
by the formula
 	 = (2.0 x time of irrigation (min)*) ÷  Discharge of dripper (litre per hour)   

 This system improves the system productivity about 2.3 % with saving of 47% 
applied irrigation water and 20% nitrogen over conventional rice-wheat system.

32. Maize-Wheat raised on permanent beds: Place drip line having inline emitter 
with discharge rate of 1.6 litre per hour having 30 cm spacing in the center of permanent 
beds of 37.5 cm bed top with 30 cm wide furrow at 20 cm depth. Apply pre-sowing 
irrigation and sow one row of maize on the centre of the bed with double disc planter 
for better crop emergence. 

For wheat, apply pre-sowing irrigation for 40 minutes about one week prior to 
sowing and sow two rows of wheat on the bed. Fertigate with 80 % recommended 
dose of nitrogen in five equal splits starting from 21 days of sowing at 10 days interval 
in both crops. The following schedule should be adopted for maize and wheat crops:

Crop Month Time of irrigation (Minutes)* Interval (days)
Maize June 45 20

July 45 10
August 45 10
September 45 7

Wheat November 40 21
December 40 10
January 40 10
February 40 10
March 40 7
April 40 5

If the discharge rate is different, then time of irrigation may be adjusted proportionally by 
the formula
 	 = (1.6 x time of irrigation (min)*) ÷  Discharge of dripper (litre per hour)   

132



 This system improves system productivity about 9% with saving of 53% applied 
irrigation water and 20% nitrogen over conventional maize-wheat system.

33. Cotton-Wheat: Place drip inline having emitter spacing of 20 cm at 20 cm 
depth keeping lateral to lateral spacing of 67.5 cm. Sow one row of cotton at 67.5 
cm spacing and three rows of wheat at 22.5 cm spacing on each drip inline during 
respective season. In cotton, apply irrigation at 5 days interval starting from 30-35 
days after sowing (DAS). Fertigate100 kg urea (45 kg N) per acre in 10 equal splits 
at 10 days interval starting from 30-35 DAS. 

In wheat, apply irrigation at 7 days interval up to mid-February and thereafter at 
5 days interval with fertigation of 80% recommended dose of NPK. Apply 1/5 dose 
of NPK at sowing and fertigate the remaining NPK in eight equal splits at 7 days 
interval starting from crown root initiation stage. If emitter discharge is 2.2 litre per 
hour, the following schedule should be adopted: 
Crop Month Time of irrigation (Minutes)*

Cotton May 40

June 40

July 35

August 30

September 25

Wheat December 30

January 65

February 70

March 50

April 50

	 If the discharge rate is different, then time of irrigation may be adjusted proportionally 
by the formula
 	 = (2.2 x time of irrigation (min)*) ÷  Discharge of dripper (litre per hour) 
34. Kharif maize-Peas-Spring maize: Install drip inlines having emitter spacing of 
30 cm at 20 cm depth keeping lateral to lateral spacing of 60 cm. One drip lateral will 
serve one row of kharif maize, two rows of peas and one row of spring maize during 
respective seasons. Use 80% of the recommended dose of nutrients in all the crops. 
Irrigate the kharif maize at 3 days interval. Apply 1/5 dose of NPK at sowing and 
fertigate the remaining P and K in 5 splits, and N in 7 splits at 9 days interval starting 
from 15 DAS. 

133



For peas, apply irrigation at 3 days interval. Apply 1/5 dose of N and P at sowing 
as basal and fertigate the remaining N and P in 9 splits at 6 days interval starting from 
25 DAS. Use SSP fertilizer for basal application of P. 

Irrigate the spring maize at 3 days interval starting from 12 DAS. Apply 1/5th dose 
of N and P at sowing and fertigate the remaining amount in 10 equal splits at 6 days 
interval starting from 30 DAS. Use urea, MAP and MOP as a source of N, P2O5 and 
K2O, respectively for fertigation. If emitter discharge is 2.2 litre per hour, the following 
schedule should be adopted: 
Crop Month Time of irrigation (Minutes)*

June 40

July 35
Kharif Maize

August 35

September 50

October 20

November 25
Peas

December 25

January 30

Spring Maize February 25

March 35

April 65

May 65

If discharge rate is different, then time of irrigation may be adjusted proportionally by 
the formula 
= (2.2 × time of irrigation (min)*) ÷ Discharge of dripper (litre per hour) 

35. Cotton-Gobhi sarson (transplanted) cropping system: Place drip inline 
having emitter spacing of 20 cm at 20 cm depth keeping lateral to lateral spacing 
of 67.5 cm and sow one row of cotton at 67.5 cm spacing. Apply irrigation at 5 days 
interval starting from 30-35 days after sowing (DAS). Fertigate 85 kg urea and 20 kg 
mono-ammonium phosphate (12-61-0) per acre in 10 equal splits at 10 days interval 
starting from 30-35 DAS. 

Transplant the succeeding gobhi sarson as per the recommended technology and 
apply irrigation immediately. Initiate drip irrigation at 15 days after transplanting at 7 
days interval as per the given schedule. Fertigation should be started at 15 days after 
transplanting and all fertilizers should be applied in 10 equal splits at 7 days interval. 

134



Fertigate 70 kg urea, 16 kg mono-ammonium phosphate and 9 kg elemental sulphur, 
respectively. If emitter discharge is 2.2 litre per hour, the following schedule should be 
adopted:

Crop Month Time of irrigation (Minutes)*

Cotton May 40
June 40
July 35
August 30
September 25

Gobhi sarson (transplanted) December 60
January 50
February 50
March 60

If discharge rate is different, then time of irrigation may be adjusted proportionally 
by the formula 

= (2.2 x time of irrigation (min)*) ÷ Discharge of dripper (litre per hour) 

CONSERVATION AGRICULTURE 

36. Rice-Wheat: Retention or incorporation of both paddy and wheat residue for 12 
year continuously in rice-wheat cropping system gives more wheat yield (22.68 q per 
acre) and rice-wheat system productivity (50.88 q per acre) over only paddy straw 
incorporation or retention. Retention or incorporation of both paddy and wheat residues 
also improved soil health which is desirable for sustainable rice-wheat production.

135



10. INTEGRATED FARMING SYSTEM
‘Integrated Farming System’ is an economically viable option to enhance the 

farm productivity, reduce the environmental degradation, nutritional security and 
upliftment of resource poor farmers. Integrated farming system is the favourable and 
adequate combination of crops, livestock, aquaculture, agro-forestry, agri-horticulture 
so as to ensure sustainability, profitability, balanced food availability and employment 
generation. In addition, integrated farming system is the resource management 
strategy for sustained production and to meet diverse requirements of farm households 
to make the agriculture cost-effective, remunerative and above all to ensure livelihood 
security of the farming community.

The Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana based on long-term research, has 
come out with 2.5 acre model of integrated farming system for small farmers with the 
following components:
Component Area (kanal)
Field crops 7.0
Fodder 4.0
Oilseeds/pulses 1.0
Fruit trees with intercropping of seasonal vegetables 4.0
Agro-forestry 1.0
Dairy(2 cows/buffaloes) shed with composting/vermicomposting unit 0.5
Goat Farming (9 does+1 buck) -
Fishery (with high density boundary planting of fruit trees and Napier 2.0
bajra) 
Kitchen gardening 0.5
Planting of turmeric on bunds around field crops -
Boundary plantation of karonda and galgal (optional) -

The integrated farming system involving crop + dairy + kitchen gardening and 
other secondary components alongwith location. Specific agri-based enterprises can 
be included after acquiring proper training. The integrated farming system is highly 
remunerative as compared to conventional rice-wheat cropping system.

136



11.   SPRAY TECHNOLOGY

The success of insect-pests, diseases and weed control depends upon use of 
proper spraying technology. Adopt following recommendations for efficient and 
effective management of weeds, insect-pests and diseases:

Selection of pesticide: Correct identification of insect-pest, disease and weed is 
very essential for proper selection of pesticides. Always use the recommended brand 
of herbicide, pesticide and fungicide.

Selection of spray pump and nozzle: Spraying of pesticides can be done with 
knapsack sprayer (manually or battery operated) or tractor  operated  sprayer (See 
Appendix V). For spray of pre-emergence herbicides at the time of sowing, use flat 
fan or flood jet nozzles. Always use flat fan nozzles for spraying post emergence 
herbicides. Use cone type nozzle for the control of insect-pests and diseases. 

Quantity of water: Always use 200 litres of water for pre-emergence herbicides 
at the time of sowing and 150 litres of water per acre for post emergence application. 
Use 200 litres of water for control of diseases and 100-150 litres of water per acre for 
control of insect pests. To estimate the water required for spraying, fill the spray pump 
with measured quantity of water and spray in the field. After spraying, measure the 
area sprayed and calculates the required quantity of water per acre by the following 
formula: 

	 	 	 	 Volume of water consumed (litre) x 4000
Quantity of water (l/acre) = 
				                  Sprayed Area (m2)
Preparation of spray fluid: According to the quantity of water needed for an acre 

as calculated above, calculate the number of spray pumps required for spraying one 
acre. For example, if water required for spraying in one acre is 150 litres and capacity 
of spray pump is 15 litre. It means 10 pumps are required for spraying one acre area. 
In this case dissolve the quantity of pesticide required for one acre in less quantity of 
water and make the volume to 10 litre. Now, pour one litre of this pesticide solution in 
one spray pump.  For tractor operated sprayer, prepare the pesticides solution as per 
the capacity of spray tank. 

Method of spray: Nozzle height at the time of spraying is very important. Maintain 
nozzle height around 1.5 feet from the crop canopy during spraying of herbicides, 
insecticides and fungicides on the crop. Similarly in case of pre-emergence herbicides, 
maintain the nozzle height at 1.5 feet from ground surface. Always spray in strips by 
keeping the spray lance straight. Do not move the spray lance to and fro. Use multiboom 
nozzles for uniform spray. In case of backpack type electrostatic sprayer, electrostatic 
nozzle should not be lifted above the shoulder height. Maintain the distance of the 
electrostatic nozzle tip about 1 to 1.5 feet above the crop canopy. Only 15 litres of 
water per acre is required for spraying with electrostatic sprayer.

137



Precautions during spraying
•	 Always purchase recommended brands of pesticides and obtain bill from the 

shopkeeper. 
•	 Read carefully instructions given on pesticide label and follow the same.
•	 Clean the spray pump with washing soda/surf solution before and after spray. If 

possible, keep separate pumps for spraying herbicide and other pesticides.
•	 Do not tear open the pesticide packet but use scissor or knife for this purpose.
•	 Use recommended dose of pesticides and apply at appropriate time.
•	 The preparation of spray solutions from concentrated  pesticides should be done 

in drums using long sticks to protect the operation from splashings and to permit 
stirring from a standing  position.

•	 Always use clean water for spraying to avoid clogging in the nozzles.
•	 Wear hand gloves for preparation of spray fluid, and gas mask, full sleeve shirt and 

trousers during spraying.
•	 Only healthy person without any wound on body should be engaged for spraying.
•	 Do not spray on an empty stomach.
•	 Never spray accross the direction of the wind flow. Spray should be done on calm 

days.
•	 Do not blow the clogged nozzle. If nozzle clogs, remove and disassemble the 

nozzle assembly. Clean the openings/filter and nozzle tips of any obstructions and 
reassemble.

•	 If the discharge rate of the nozzle exceeds by 10-15% than the initial discharge 
rate, the nozzle is considered as worn out. Replace the worn out nozzle.

•	 Do not touch the nozzle tip while operating the backpack type air-assisted 
electrostatic sprayer.

•	 Operator should not work for more than 8 hours a day. Those engaged in handling 
pesticides should be checked by a physician regularly.

•	 The worker should not smoke, chew, eat or drink while spraying and must wash 
hands and feet thoroughly with soap and water after handling or use of pesticide.

•	 Keep pesticides in labelled containers only.
•	 Store pesticides in a safe and locked place, out of the reach of children, irresponsible 

persons and pets.
•	 Never store pesticides near foodstuffs or medicines.
•	 Do not use the empty containers of pesticides for any purpose. Destroy them by 

making holes.

138



12. MANAGEMENT OF RODENTS 
        AND BIRDS

A. Management of Rodents 
Rats and mice are the most serious pests of crops and must be controlled. By 

virtue of their extremely adaptable nature, highly intelligent patterns of behaviour and 
tremendous potential to multiply, they maintain their large populations which cause 
extensive damage in crop fields and other premises. They cause more damage at 
seedling and ripening stages of the crops. The performance of different control methods 
vary in different situations and at different stages of the crop.  The best control success 
can only be achieved if these methods are adopted properly at appropriate timings.

Methods of Control:
i. Mechanical Control 
•	 Killing: During irrigation of vacant harvested fields, rats coming out of flooded 

burrows may be killed with sticks.
•	 Trapping: In crop fields place 16 traps/acre covering runways, damage and activity 

sites of rodents.  In houses, godowns, poultry farms etc., set traps (1 trap/4-8 m2 
area) along the walls, in corners, behind the storage bins and boxes etc. Kill the 
trapped rats by drowning in water and the interval between two trappings at the 
same location should not be less than 30 days. Do not place the traps at the same 
place again and again.

ii. Cultural Control 
Weeds, grasses and bushes should be removed from the fields as these provide 

shelter and food to rats and mice. Highly infested bunds, water channels and field 
pavements should be periodically rebuilt to destroy permanent rat burrows. Keep the 
height and width of bunds to minimum and avoid crop lodging.  
iii. Biological Control 

Owls, kites, hawks, falcons, eagles, snakes, monitor lizards, cats, mongoose etc. 
are the natural predators of rats and mice. These should be protected.
iv. Chemical Control
Poison Bait Preparation

The acceptance of poison baits by rats and mice depends upon the quality, texture, 
taste and odour of the baiting materials, therefore, bait should be prepared as under:
•	 Zinc phosphide bait (2%): Take 1 kg of bajra or sorghum or cracked wheat or their 

mixture and mix it thoroughly with 20 g of edible vegetable oil, 20 g of powdered 
sugar and 25 g of 80% zinc phosphide powder.

139



Caution: Never allow water to mix in zinc phosphide bait and always use freshly prepared bait.  
Minimum interval between two baitings of zinc phosphide must be 2 months. To increase the 
acceptance and efficacy of zinc phosphide bait, do pre-baiting. For this place bajra or sorghum 
or cracked wheat or their mixture smeared with oil and powdered sugar @ 400g/acre at 40 bait 
points on pieces of paper for 2-3 days.

•	 Bromadiolone bait (0.005%): Take 1 kg of bajra or sorghum or cracked wheat or 
their mixture or flour and mix it thoroughly with 20 g of edible vegetable oil, 20 g of 
powdered sugar and 20 g of 0.25% bromadiolone powder. 

Poison Bait Placement and Timings
a. Wheat Crop
•	 In fields sown under conventional tillage, period of mid February to early March 

(before milky grain stage) is critical for the control of rats and mice as acceptance 
of bait is poor after this period due to abundant food available to them in the form 
of ripening crops.  During this period place zinc phosphide or bromadiolone bait @ 
400g/acre throughout the field on pieces of paper. 

•	 Rat infestation and damage is more in fields sown under zero tillage. In such fields 
do first poison baiting with zinc phosphide in burrows before sowing (late October 
and early November) of wheat. Do second poison baiting with zinc phosphide or 
bromadiolone @ 400 g/acre on pieces of paper in mid February to early March.	

•	 Rat infestation and damage is still higher in fields sown with Happy Seeder. 
In such fields do first poison baiting with zinc phosphide in burrows twice at an 
interval of 10-15 days after sowing of crop in the months of November-December. 
Do second poison baiting with zinc phosphide or bromadiolone @ 400 g/acre on 
pieces of paper in mid February to early March.	

b. Sugarcane Crop
Since sugarcane crop harbours high rodent population, poison baiting should 

be done first in July (after paddy transplantation) and second in October-November 
(after paddy harvest). At each of these two timings do baiting with zinc phosphide or 
bromadiolone followed by another baiting after 15 days with bromadiolone @400 g per 
acre each. If the crop is to be harvested after January-February, third baiting should be 
done with bromadiolone @800 g per acre on 40 bait papers in January. 

For burrow baiting, close all the burrows in the evening and in the reopened 
burrows on the next day insert a paper boat containing about 10 g of poison bait 6 
inches deep in each burrow. In case of covered burrows, gently remove the soil from 
the burrow opening to locate the tunnel and then put the poison bait deep inside it. 

For paper baiting, place 10 g of zinc phosphide or bromadiolone bait on pieces of 
paper at 40 bait points per acre on dry sites throughout the field covering runways and 
activity sites of rats.
Note: In crop fields, the rodenticide baiting should be done when the number of live rodent burrows 

is more than 10/acre.

Safety Measures: 
•	 Keep the rodenticides and poison baits away from reach of children, domestic 

animals, pets and birds.
140



•	 Mixing of rodenticides in the baiting material should be done with a stick, spade or 
by wearing gloves. Avoid inhaling of poison through mouth and nose. 

•	 Household utensils should never be used for preparation of the poison bait.
•	 Collect and burry the left over poison bait and dead rats.
•	 Zinc phosphide is toxic and there is no antidote for it. In case of its accidental 

ingestion induce vomiting by inserting fingers in the throat and rush to a doctor. 
•	 Vitamin K is the antidote for bromadiolone which can be given to the patient under 

medical supervision.
v. Integrated Approach 

No single method is 100% effective in controlling rats and mice. Left over population 
reproduces reaching the original size in a short time. Therefore, adopt an integrated 
approach by using different methods at different stages of the crop. 

Village Level Campaign 
Control of rats and mice in smaller areas usually becomes ineffective due to 

their migration from the surrounding untreated fields. Therefore, for better results 
village level anti-rat campaigns, to cover maximum possible area, both cultivated and 
uncultivated, should be organized.

Rodent Proof Storage Structure 
For rodent proofing of cover and plinth storage structure made under outdoor bulk 

grain storage conditions, built plinth at a height of 2.5 feet from ground level and extend 
platform by one foot from all the four sides of the plinth.

B. Management of Birds
Birds, in general, are both useful and harmful to agriculture. Even the same 

species may be beneficial or problematic in different situations. Only a few of about 
300 species of birds of Punjab cause problems in crop fields and granaries. The 
rose–ringed parakeet is the only bird that seems to be exclusively harmful to farmers’ 
interests.

Harmful Birds: Parakeet is the major bird pest causing serious damage to almost 
all cereal crops. It is particularly harmful to sunflower. House crows damage sprouting 
maize, sunflower and maturing maize. Doves and pigeons damage pulses. Sparrow 
and weaver birds damage stored grains at shellers and godowns. These  birds also 
damage rice nurseries and maturing bajra and sorghum.
Management Techniques for Harmful Birds
i. Mechanical Control: 
•	 Use crackers to scare the birds at different intervals.
•	 Fixing of scare crows i.e. a discarded earthen pot painted to stimulate human like 

head supported with wooden sticks and clothed in human dress to give a human 
like appearance is one of the most effective traditional techniques to keep the 

141



birds away. Position, direction and the dress of the scare crow should be changed 
at least at 10 days interval. The height of the scare crow should be 1 meter above 
from the crop height.

•	 Use automatic bird scarers by shifting their position periodically and supplementing 
their noise with other simple method like use of rope crackers. It involves tying of 
sets of small fire crackers at a distance of 6-8 inches apart and igniting it from the 
lower end. The explosions caused by the fire crackers on catching fire at different 
intervals scare the birds feeding on sproutings. Fix up the rope crackers in the 
centre of the field during sprouting stage whereas in maturing crops fix the rope on 
a stick in the periphery of the field.

ii. Cultural Practices
•	 The traditional practices of planting 2-3 border rows of less costly crops like millet, 

maize and dhaincha equally preferred by birds will reduce the bird pressure to the 
inside sown cash crops particularly sunflower and maize etc. Moreover, planting 
of these crops also act as physical barriers/ wind breakers and help in preventing 
lodging of crops during stormy/rainy days.

•	 As far as possible sowing of maize and sunflower crop should be avoided at sites 
most frequently visited by birds or where there are more resting sites like trees, 
electric wires, buildings etc.

•	 To prevent parakeet damage in sunflower and maize crops sowing should be 
discouraged in small block areas, at least 2-3 acre block area is more suitable, for 
lessening bird damage pressure because parakeet avoid feeding /venturing in the 
core of the field.

iii. Alarming Calls
Playing of CD (available with Centre of Communication and International Linkages, 

PAU, Ludhiana) of distress or flock calls of parakeets and crows respectively at peak 
volume for ½ hr twice each in the morning between 7.00 to 9.00 a.m. and in the 
evening at 5.00 to 7.00 p.m. respectively, with a pause of 1 hour, scare the birds or halt 
their activities for full day in the freshly sown, emerging or maturing crop fields and in 
orchards. Use of distress or flock calls remain effective for 15-20 days. Better results 
can be obtained by using this technique in sequence or in combination with other 
methods as an integrated pest management. For covering larger area use of amplifier 
and additional speakers as per requirement can be done.
Conservation of useful Birds

Predatory birds like owls, falcons, hawks, eagles, kites etc. eat large number of rats 
and mice. A single owl normally eats 4-5 rats a day. Insect eating birds like drongos, 
babblers, shrikes, lapwings, mynas and many other small birds eat away numerous 
insect pests. Even grainivorous birds like sparrows and weaver birds feed a large 
number of insects to their young ones. A single pair of house sparrow feed insects to 
their young about 250 times a day. Therefore, the useful birds should not be killed. 
Rather they can be attracted to crop fields in several different ways.

142



APPENDIX- I(A)

MINIMUM SUPPORT PRICE OF DIFFERENT CROPS 

								                     (₹ per quintal)
Crop Crop year

2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25

Paddy (Common) 1868 1940 2040 2183 2300

Paddy (Grade ‘A’) 1888 1960 2060 2203 2320

Jowar (Hybrid) 2620 2738 2970 3180 3371

Bajra 2150 2250 2350 2500 2625

Maize 1850 1870 1962 2090 2225

Arhar (Tur) 6000 6300 6600 7000 7550

Moong 7196 7275 7755 8558 8682

Mash (Urad) 6000 6300 6600 6950 7400

Groundnut 5275 5550 5850 6377 6783

Sunflower Seed 5885 6015 6400 6760 7280

Soybean 3880 3950 4300 4600 4892

Sesamum 6855 7307 7830 8635 9267

Cotton 5515 5726 6080 6620 7121
(Medium staple)
Cotton (Long staple) 5825 6025 6380 7020 7521

Wheat 1975 2015 2125 2275 2425

Barley 1600 1635 1735 1850 1980

Gram 5100 5230 5335 5440 5650

Lentil (Massar) 5100 5500 6000 6425 6700

Rapeseed/ Mustard 4650 5050 5450 5650 5950

Sugarcane# 310/300/295 360/350/345 380/370/365 391/381/381 401/391/391

# State Advisory Price for early/mid/late sugarcane varieties

143



APPENDIX- I(B)
DISTRICT-WISE AREA, PRODUCTION AND YIELD OF VARIOUS RABI CROPS, 2023-24

District Wheat Barley Total Rabi Cereals
A P Y A P Y A P

Amritsar 188.6 956.4 5071 - - - 188.6 956.4

Barnala 113.2 643.1 5681 0.3 1.3 4209 113.5 644.4

Bathinda 254.4 1299.7 5109 0.6 2.3 3684 255 1302
Faridkot 114.9 619.1 5388 0.1 0.5 4598 115 619.6
Fatehgarh 
Sahib 84.5 427.6 5060 0.2 0.7 3642 84.7 428.3

Fazilka 198 1022.9 5166 0.8 3.1 3857 198.8 1026

Ferozepur 188.5 989.1 5247 - - - 188.5 989.1

Gurdaspur 185 900.6 4868 - - - 185 900.6

Hoshiarpur 144 611.7 4248 - - - 144 611.7

Jalandhar 173.5 840.6 4845 - - - 173.5 840.6

Kapurthala 106.2 535.8 5045 - - - 106.2 535.8

Ludhiana 243.6 1247.7 5122 1 3.5 3455 244.6 1251.2

Malerkotla 52 292.3 5621 0.4 1.6 4014 52.4 293.9

Mansa 172.8 980.5 5674 0.3 0.9 2877 173.1 981.4

Moga 177.6 977.3 5503 0.2 0.7 3651 177.8 978

Pathankot 40.5 165.7 4092 - - - 40.5 165.7

Patiala 232.8 1182.4 5079 0.2 0.7 3499 233 1183.1

Rupnagar 67.2 327.7 4877 0.1 0.4 3588 67.3 328.1

S.A.S. Nagar 52.2 226.9 4347 0.1 0.3 2725 52.3 227.2

S.B.S. Nagar 77.8 379.2 4874 - - - 77.8 379.2

Sangrur 239.2 1355.3 5666 0.6 2.6 4279 239.8 1357.9
Sri Muktsar 
Sahib 216.7 1208.8 5578 0.2 0.8 3804 216.9 1209.6

Tarn Taran 192.6 985.1 5115 - - - 192.6 985.1

State 3515.8 18176 5170 5.1 19.1 3737 3520.9 18195.2
A: Area in 000 hectares, P: Production in 000 metric tonnes, Y: Average yield in kg/ha
Source: Department of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Punjab

144



District-wise Area, Production and Yield of Various Rabi Crops, 2023-24
District Rapeseed & Mustard Gram Lentil (Massar)

A P Y A P Y A P Y

Amritsar 2.5 4.5 1799 - - - - - -

Barnala 0.8 1.5 1841 0.1 0.18 1799 - - -

Bathinda 3 5 1681 0.1 0.1 960 - - -

Faridkot 0.7 1.3 1836 0.13 0.05 1495 - - -
Fatehgarh 
Sahib 0.9 1.7 1925 - - - - - -

Fazilka 7.9 13.1 1655 0.9 1.51 1679 - - -

Ferozepur 0.7 1.4 1965 - - - - - -

Gurdaspur 3 4.2 1413 - - - 0.1 0.05 471

Hoshiarpur 4 4.7 1186 0.03 0.03 888 0.1 0.05 462

Jalandhar 0.8 1.2 1489 - - - - - -

Kapurthala 0.7 1.2 1755 - - - - - -

Ludhiana 2.1 4.2 2007 - - - - - -

Malerkotla 0.4 0.6 1585 - - - - - -

Mansa 2.8 4.9 1744 0.1 0.13 1323 - - -

Moga 0.9 1.6 1731 - - - - - -

Pathankot 1 1.4 1396 0.02 - 96 - - -

Patiala 1.1 1.8 1650 - - - - - -

Rupnagar 3.2 4.7 1463 0.1 0.16 1576 - - -
S.A.S. 
Nagar 1.2 1.6 1374 - - - 0.2 0.1 491

S.B.S. 
Nagar 1.4 2.2 1552 - - - - - -

Sangrur 1.6 2.9 1798 0.02 0.05 1804 - - -
Sri Muktsar 
Sahib 1.3 1.9 1485 - - - - - -

Tarn Taran 1.1 1.7 1578 - - - - - -

State 43.1 69.4 1611 1.4 2.2 1561 0.4 0.2 478
A: Area in 000 hectares, P: Production in 000 metric tonnes, Y: Average yield in kg/ha
Source: Department of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Punjab

145



District-wise Area, Production and Yield of Various Rabi Crops, 2023-24
District Sugarcane  (cane) Sunflower

A P Y A P Y

Amritsar 6.6 551 83430 - - -

Barnala 0.2 18 88080 - - -

Bathinda 0.1 8 83254 - - -

Faridkot - - - - - -
Fatehgarh 
Sahib 2.3 182 78994 0.1 0.2 1988

Fazilka 1 43 42673 - - -

Ferozepur 0.1 6 63940 - - -

Gurdaspur 22 1996 90724 - - -

Hoshiarpur 25.1 1989 79246 - - -

Jalandhar 9.6 796 82931 - - -

Kapurthala 3.7 318 86000 - - -

Ludhiana 2.4 214 89035 - - -

Malerkotla 0.6 54 90175 - - -

Mansa - - - - - -

Moga 0.1 8 83254 - - -

Pathankot 3.7 271 73345 - - -

Patiala 1.5 141 93931 0.2 0.4 2087

Rupnagar 2.6 189 72517 - - -

S.A.S. Nagar 1.6 122 76451 0.6 1.2 2006

S.B.S. Nagar 5.3 452 85196 - - -

Sangrur 1 99 99261 - - -
Sri Muktsar 
Sahib 0.2 17 83254 - - -

Tarn Taran 0.5 36 72260 - - -
State 90.2 7510 83254 0.9 1.8 2022
A: Area in 000 hectares, P: Production in 000 metric tonnes, Y: Average yield in kg/ha
Source: Department of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Punjab

146



147

APPENDIX- II(A)
FIELD STANDARDS FOR FOUNDATION AND CERTIFIED SEEDS

 Crop Isolation % Pollen  % Off type % Inseparable % Objectionable % Plants/earheads Remarks
distance shedders plants other crop plants/ weeds affected by seed 
(metre) (maximum) (maximum) earheads (maximum) born disease 

(maximum) (maximum)
F C F C F C F C F C F C

Wheat 3 3 - - 0.05 0.20 0.01* 0.05* - - 0.10 0.50 Loose smut

Barley 3 3 - - 0.05 0.20 0.01** 0.05** - - 0.10 0.50 Loose smut

Gram 10 5 - - 0.10 0.20 - - - - - -

Lentil 10 5 - - 0.10 0.20 - - - - - -

Pea 10 5 - - 0.10 0.20 - - - - - -

Rapeseed and 100 50 - - 0.10 0.50 - - 0.05# 0.10#
Mustard
Linseed 50 25 - - 0.05 0.10 - - - - - -

Berseem 400 100 - - 0.20 1.00 - - None## 0.05## - -

Sunflower 600 400 0.5 1.0 0.20 0.50 - - None ### None### 0.05 0.50 Downy 
hybrids Mildew
F: Foundation   C: Certified
* Barley, Oats, Gram & Triticale                  ** Oats, Wheat, Gram & Triticale               # Mexican prickly poppy (Satyanasi)
## Chicory (Kasni)                                        ## # Wild Helianthus spp. (Wild Sunflower)



148

APPENDIX- II(B)
SEED CERTIFICATION STANDARDS FOR FOUNDATION AND CERTIFIED SEEDS

 Crop % Pure % Inert No. of Seeds per Kg (Maximum) Diseased Germina- Moisture % 
Seed matter Other crop Weed seeds Objectionable seeds (%) tion % (Maximum)

(Minimum) (Maximum) (Minimum)
   seeds weed seeds

F & C F & C F C F C F C F C F & C F & C

Wheat 98 2 10 20 10 20 2# 5# None* None* 
0.05** 0.25** 85 12

Barley 98 2 10 20 10 20 - - - - 85 12

Gram 98 2 - - - - - - - - 85 9

Lentil 98 2 5 10 10 20 - - - - 75 9

Pea 98 2 None 5 None None - - - - 75 9

Rape-
seed and 97 3 10 20 10 20 5## 10## - - 85 8
Mustard

Linseed 98 2 10 20 5 10 - - - - 80 9

Berseem 98 2 10 20 10 20 5### 10### - - 80 10

Sun-
flower 98 2 None None 5 10 None None None^ None^ 70 9
Hybrids
F: Foundation	    C: Certified        # Wild morning glory (Hiran Khuri) and Gulli Danda                  ## Satyanashi   
### Chicory (kasni)    * Ear Cockle and Tundu,  **Karnal Bunt
^ Orobanche cumana disease --Huskless seeds in Sunflower F & C (maximum) 2.0% in both the cases.



APPENDIX- III
AGRICULTURAL ENGINEERING

I) Recommendations for Implements/Machines
General recommendations in respect of implements and machines used in 

agriculture are given below:
•	 The selection of the implements or machinery should be made on the basis of size 

and draft requirements which should match with the power available on the farm.
•	 Design, field capacity, materials, availability of spare parts and cost of operation 

per hour or per acre are important criteria to be considered in order to arrive at the 
decision to own a machine or any implement.

•	 Implements and machines including tractor involve a lot of investment.  Periodic 
maintenance before and after the use of machinery is therefore, very necessary. 
In most cases, owner’s manuals will provides safe guidelines. On following these 
guidelines, machinery is expected to give un-interrupted service throughout its life.

•	 The seed-cum-fertilizer drill and the tractor mounted sprayer should be calibrated 
before they are used. 

•	 Safety rules must be followed and adhered to strictly while operating tractors and 
high-speed agricultural machinery to avoid the loss of life and property.

Seed-cum-Fertilizer Drill 
In selecting a seed-cum-fertilizer drill, the following points should be considered:

•	 It must have provision for varying line-to-line distance.
•	 The machine must have provision to control the depth of seed placement.
•	 The metering system of the drill should not damage the seeds which pass through 

the system.
•	 All furrow openers must deliver the same quantity of seed and fertilizer.
•	 A good agitator in the fertilizer box is desirable to avoid bridging.
•	 There should be provision for disengaging the seed and fertilizer distribution 

system.
For proper   selection   of   seed-cum-fertilizer drills, the Test    Reports     issued 

by the Farm Machinery Testing Centre of the Punjab Agricultural University must be 
considered.
Calibration of Drill

Calibration means such a setting of the metering mechanism that ensures the 
dropping of the right quantity of seed and fertilizer in the field. The drills are already 
calibrated by the manufacturers, but the calibration may become defective during 
transportation. Further, the same calibration may not be found appropriate for all 
varieties of seed. The method of calibration is given below:
•	 Jack-up the seed-cum-fertilizer drill and check the free rotation of the driving wheel 

and the grain and fertilizer feed-shafts.
149



•	 Place the container or bag under each seed tube.
•	 Measure the circumference of the wheel. The circumference gives the distance 

covered in one revolution of the wheel.
•	 Find out the size of the drill by multiplying the number of furrow-openers by the 

distance between the furrow openers.
•	 Find out the number of revolutions required to sow one acre area as follows:	
	 	                                             Area of an acre (4000 sq. m.)
	 Number of revolutions =   
	 	                                     Size of drill (m) X Circumference of wheel (m)

•	 Multiply this figure by 9/10 to take care of the wheel-slippage in the field.
•	 Mark a point on the rim of the wheel. Rotate the wheel by 1/10th of the number of 

revolutions required to sow one acre as above. Collect the seed quantity from each 
container separately and weigh.

•	 For getting seed rate per acre, multiply by 10.
•	 If the quantity collected from each container is not uniform, then check for a defect 

in the seed-dropping mechanism.
•	 Adjust the shift-lever on the feed box for grain rate accordingly, i.e. if the seed rate 

seems to be less than the actual quantity required per acre and then move the 
indicator a little to the higher side and vice-versa.

•	 Repeat this process twice to get the correct setting of the seed rate.
•	 Calibrate in the same manner for fertilizer rate.
Weight of Seeds Dropped in Five Revolutions of ground wheel

(For each seed tube of seed-cum-fertilizer drill)
Distance between rows Size of  Wheel

45 cm/18’’ 60 cm/24’’ 75 cm/30’’ 90 cm/36’’

20 cm/8’’ 15-18 grams 20-22 grams 25-28 grams 32-34 grams

22 cm/9’’ 18-20 grams 24-26 grams 30-33 grams 37-39 grams

Combine Harvester
Some farmers own combines while some other get this facility on custom hire 

basis from the other agencies. There have been reports that in several instances the 
combine did a poor job, resulting in considerable loss of grain. The loss of grains as 
loose grains or ear heads can occur at the following points in a combine:

(i) 	 At the cutter bar: These losses can be seen on the ground if all the discharge 
from behind the machine is collected in a bag and then the machine performance is 
observed for some distance. These can be avoided or reduced by setting the proper 
height of cutter-bar-reel and forward speed.

150



(ii) 	Behind the Machine: These losses will be either in the form of unthreshed 
heads or loose grains. Too many unthreshed heads mean that the cylinder-speed 
and the cylinder-concave clearance are not properly adjusted. Too many loose grains 
may be due to many chocked sieves or excessive air blasts or both. Proper machine 
adjustment including running at speed according to the plant density can reduce such 
losses.

(iii) Grain Delivery: Unclean grain or broken grain or both will result from excessive 
cylinder speed or improper sieve-chaffer setting or improper forward speed.

Combine is very sensitive to adjustments which are required to be made at turning                                           
or according to the varying plant density, crop conditions (lodged etc.) and ground                                                   
level (bunds) etc.

To get a rough estimate of losses, measure one metre square area and collect the 
grain and loose material fallen on it behind a combine. Separate the grains and weigh 
in grams. Multiply this by 10 to get the loss in kilograms per hectare. Alternatively, 
estimate the loss by counting the number of grains collected from one square metre 
area. One hundred grains per sq. metre mean about 40 kg per hectare for wheat.
Tips to Save Diesel
•	 Badly maintained tractor wastes upto 25 per cent of the diesel used.
•	 Prevent leakage of diesel as it is a direct wastage.
•	 Wrong gear selection can increase fuel consumption upto 30 per cent and reduce 

output upto 50 per cent.
•	 A smoky tractor wastes diesel upto 20 per cent.
•	 Unfiltered air wears out cylinder bore 45 times faster and piston rings 115 times 

faster than normal which results in loss of power and wastage of diesel.
•	 Avoid unnecessary slippage of tractor wheels with the help of water ballast and/or 

cast iron weights in case of sandy soils and use cage wheel in wet land condition 
to avoid slippage.

•	 Relug worn out tyres.
•	 Operate the tractor at the correct throttle setting to give the recommended PTO 

speed for operating pumping set or thresher.
•	 Keep the correct inflation pressure in tyres.

Guidelines for proper maintenance of farm machinery
•	 Remove the fertilizer and chemical from hoppers and tanks of sowing machines 

and plant-protection equipment respectively to prevent rusting and clogging of 
opening and allied components of metering and dispensing devices.

•	 Clean and wash the soil and dirt from your equipment and check all nuts, bolts, 
washers, pins, grease nipples and cups after each day’s work.

•	 Lubricate all bearings, joint and pivot points with grease or oil of the recommended 
grade after each day’s work or as recommended by the manufacturers.

151



•	 Check the cutting edges of the soil-working tools and blades of harvesting 
equipment, sharpen them for smooth working and coat them with grease or mobile 
oil to avoid rusting.

•	 Check the oil level of the gear box and top up if necessary.
•	 If machine has belt-drive, one must check the belt tension and tight the belt if 

necessary.
•	 Clean the chains thoroughly; wash them with oil and coat the links with grease or 

use engine oil to prevent them from rusting.
•	 In the off-season, keep your machine under covered shed to protect against sun, 

rain and dust, otherwise its life will be shortened. Paint your equipment if it has 
come off.

•	 For all equipment with tyres, place logs or bricks under the axle or frame to remove 
the load from the tyres.

Farm Equipment/Implements Recommended for Various Operations for 
Rabi Crops
Operation    Implement Source of Capacity/ output Remarks/Comments                     

Power
Tractor Machines Tractor As per tractor- An auto-steering system can be 

for tillage (any hp) machine capacity installed on tractors for various field 
and sowing operations to enhance operational 
operation efficiency and reduce operator 

discomfort.
Lawn grass Tractor Tractor 5.0 acres/day, It can cut and collect grass 
cutter and Operated Turf (50 hp or Fuel consumption simultaneously. It helps saving 
collecter Manager for above) 5-8 l/acre and labour and time for collection of 

cutting and Capacity 300-700 grass after cutting. 
collecting grass kg/hr

Paddy Straw Management
Combine Self- 13-16 acre/day Super straw management system 
harvester with propelled (SMS) attached at rear of combine 
PAU Super (80-120 harvester for chopping and even 
SMS hp) distribution of loose straw.
attachment
Happy seeder Tractor 5.0-6.25 acre/day Wheat can be directly drilled into 

(45 hp or combine harvested paddy field 
above) without any burning or removal. The 

loose straw should be uniformLy 
spread in the field before sowing 
either manually or harvest paddy 
with combine harvested fitted with 
PAU Super SMS. 

PAU straw Tractor 9-10 acre/day It improves the efficiency (20%) of 
cutter cum (35 hp or PAU Happy Seeder by chopping and 
spreader above) spreading of straw after combine 

harvesting of paddy.   

152



PAU Happy Tractor 6.0-7.0 acre/day Wheat can be directly drilled into 
seeder (45 hp or combine harvested paddy field 

above) without any burning or removal. The 
loose straw and standing stubbles 
should be cut and spread by stubble 
shaver/cutter.  

Paddy straw Tractor 6-7 acre/day The paddy straw chopper cum 
chopper cum (40 hp or spreader chop the straw into small 
spreader above) pieces and spread it on the surface.

Stubble Shaver Tractor 12-14 acre/day For cutting standing stubbles
(35 hp or 
above)

Mould-board Tractor 5.4-6.75 acre/day Used to open up unploughed land.
plough (35 hp or Field capacity will depend upon size of 

above) implement and soil conditions.

Reversible Tractor 5.8-7.25 acre/day
Mould-board (45 hp or 
plough above)
Biomass Tractor 5.0-5.6 acre/day Used to simultaneously perform the 
Incorporator (50 hp or function of mould board plough along 
(Modified Mould above) with breaking big soil clods. This will 
Board Plough reduce the number of secondary 
with Clod tillage machinery operations needed 
Crusher) for seedbed preparation. It can also 

be used to incorporate chopped 
green manure/biomass into the soil. 

Straw Baler Tractor 8.0 acre/day It collects the straw and compress in 
(50 hp or the form of bales.
above)

Zero-till-Drill Tractor 7-10 acre/day Wheat can be sown in unprepared 
(35 hp or field after harvest
above)

Strip-till-Drill Tractor 6.25-8.75 acre/ Wheat can be sown in unprepared 
(35 hp or day field after harvest
above)

Super Seeder Tractor 4.5-5.5 acre/day Wheat seeds can be directly drilled 
(55 hp or into combine harvested paddy 
above) fields without any straw burning or 

removal and also in cotton stalks. 
Harvest paddy with combine 
harvester fitted with Super SMS 
before sowing of wheat. Wheat 
straw can be incorporated into soil 
with this machine also.

PAU Smart  Tractor 7-8 acre/day
Seeder (45 hp or 

above)

153



Combine with Tractor 1.0-1.25 acre/h SMS attached at rear of combine 
SMS mounted below the straw walkers and behind 
attachment combine the chaffer sieves for uniform 

(50-60 hp) distributions of loose straw. SMS is 
operated with-

Self- 2.0-2.50 acre/h •	 V-belts and pulley arrangement 
propelled used for power transmission 
combine should be appropriately covered 

80-120 hp against paddy residues.
•	 Counter rotating discs should 

remain in motion during 
harvesting operation in the field 
for uniform spreading of residues.

PAU Surface Tractor 15 acre/day For uniform broadcasting of seed 
Seeder (40 hp or and fertilizer along with cutting 

above) and spreading of whole straw in 
a combine harvested (fitted with 
Super SMS) field.

Harrowing
Sub-soiler Tractor 6-8 acre/day Used to open up unploughed land.

(45 hp or Field capacity will depend upon size of 
above) implement and soil conditions.

Disc-Harrow Tractor 6.25-8.75 acre/ Used to break clods, chop weeds 
(Spike Tooth) (35 hp or day and pulverising soil

above)

Bar-harrow Tractor 7.5-8.75 acre/day Breakes soil crust and uproots early 
(Spike Tooth) (35 hp or weeds

above)

Cultivator Tractor 6.25-12.5 acre/ Loosen the soil for better aeration 
(35 hp or day and pulverisation
above)

Cultivator with Tractor 6.25-12.5 acre/ For better pulverisation and fuel 
pulverising roller (35 hp or day saving

above)
Seeding and Fertilizer application

Seed-cum- Tractor 9.0-11.0 acre/day For uniform seed and fertilizer 
Fertilizer Drill (35 hp or distributions in rows

above)
Dual seed drill 6.25-8.75 acre/ Single machine can sow oil seed 

day (small seeds) and wheat.

Lucky-seed-drill Tractor 6.0-8.0 acre/day This machine has automatic 
(35 hp or spraying attachment which is used 
above) for sowing and simulaneous spray 

of pre-emergence herbicides.

Row crop Tractor 7.5-10.0 acre/day Sunflower and maize seed can be 
planter (Inclined (35 hp or planted on ridges or flat field using 
plate) above) ridger/flat type planters.

154



Manual oilseed Two 1.25-2.0 acre/day For sowing of gobhi sarson and 
drill persons raya and for intercropping in wheat 

PAU manually Manual 0.15-0.28 acres/hr For direct sowing of   crops like 
operated seeder peas, radish, turnip, spinach, gram, 

fenugreek, okra, mustard, millets 
etc. and suitable for small farmers.

Ridger  planter Tractor 35 7.50 -10.0 acre/ Maize seed can be planted on 
hp day ridges 

Tractor operated Tractor 4.0 acre/day Use setts of 20” length
S u g a r c a n e 35 hp or 
planter above
Tractor operated Tractor 2.5-30 acre/day This machine cuts sugarcane setts, 
S u g a r c a n e 40 hp or applies fungicide, insecticides 
cutter planter above automatically. Row spacing 60-90 

cm adjustable.
Tractor operated Tractor 6-8 acre/day This machine makes trenches for 
S u g a r c a n e 35 hp or paired row sugarcane planting and 
trench digger above a bed for intercropping. The paired 

two row spacing 30 cm. 
Tractor operated Tractor 2-3 acre/day This machine makes trench and cut 
S u g a r c a n e 45 hp or sugarcane setts, apply fertilizer and  
trench planter above plant two rows of sugarcane.

Sprayers
Knapsack Manual 1.5-1.75 acre/day                                     --
sprayer
Power operated Engine/ 6.25-30.0 acre/ Depending upon the power source 
Boom Sprayer Tractor day and number of nozzles.

Boom Type Four 2.0-3.45 acre/ For spraying in row crops such as 
Sprayer wheel hour paddy, wheat etc.
attachment drive self 

propelled 
paddy 
vehicle

Drone/ Battery 2.5 acre /hour A hexacopter drone fitted with a flat 
Unmanned (Lithium fan nozzle or anti-drift/air induction 
Aerial Vehicle Polymer) nozzles to be operated (by certified 
(UAV) fitted pilot) at a pressure of 1.38 kg cm-2 
with spraying along with a forward speed of drone 
system 2.0-3.0 m/s and at height of 2.0-3.0 

m above the crop.
Mulching for weed control and moisture conservation

Paddy straw Tractor 6.0-7.0 acre/day It reduces straw size and spreads 
bale shredder (35 hp or it uniformly in the field to act as a 
cum mulcher above) mulch.

155



Interculture
Kasola-hoe Manual 0.38-0.50 acre/ --

day
V-Blade hoe -do- -do- --
Wheel hand hoe -do- 0.75-1.25 acre/ --

day
Rotary weeder Tractor 0.75-1.0 acre/h For weeding in wide row crops 

35 hp or especially sugarcane.
above

Harvesting
a) Wheat Vertical Tractor 7.5-10 acre/day Eight persons are required for crop 
stacking Conveyor (35 hp or collection       

Reaper above)

b) Berseem Scythe Manual 0.38-0.50 acre/ Saves 60% labour in comparison to 
day sickle

Threshing
a) Wheat Spike Tooth 5-20 hp 0.8-7.5 q/h --

Thresher motor/
Tractor

Syndicator/ -do- 1.5-12.0 q/h Can handle wet crop also.
Toka Thresher
Harambha 15-20 hp 10-15 q/h              --  do  --
Thresher motor/

Tractor
b) Sunflower Sunflower 7.5-15 hp 4-10 q/h Sunflower heads are fed for 

Thresher motor or threshing.
Tractor

c) Maize Rasp bar 20 hp 20-30 q/h Threshing can be done with husk
thresher/ motor or 
combine combine
Maize sheller 5-20 hp 5-10 q/h

motor/
tractor

Maize dehusker 5-20 hp 15-20 q/h Maize with husk can be threshed
cum thresher motor/

tractor
d) Raya Spike tooth 5-20 hp 1-5 q/h i)   Retain only two spikes in each 

thresher motor/ row in a spiral manner.
tractor ii)  Increase concave clearance to 

25 mm.
iii) Use concave having bar to bar 
spacing of 6 mm.
iv) Reduce speed of threshing drum 
to 3/4th by replacing pulley.
v)  Use sieve having holes of 3 mm 
diameter and bottom screen with 
blank sheet.

156



e) Moong Spike tooth 7.5 hp 2.5 q/h Spike tooth thresher for wheat can 
Thresher thresher electric be used with following modifications:

motor/ i) Retain only one spike in each row 
equivalent in a spiral manner. 

diesel 
engine/ ii) Increase concave clearance to 25 
Tractor mm.

iv) Operate the thresher at peripheral 
speed of 19-21. This can be achieved 
by increasing the existing pulley size 
on thresher by factor of 1.1 to 1.2. 

Combine
Tractor mounted Tractor 1.0-1.25 acre/h --
combine (50-60 hp)
Self-propelled 80-120 2.0-2.50 acre/h --
combine HP
Self- Propelled -do- 5- 8 acre/day 1. Adjustment needed
combine (with 2. Six persons are required for 
Maize header) machine operation

Wheat straw Tractor 6.25-7.0 acre/day Stubbles can be bruised as wheat 
combine (50 hp or straw (TURI)

above)

II) Selection, Installation and Operation of Farm Pumps
Irrigation Pumps 

Four types of pumps are used for irrigation in Punjab. They are centrifugal pumps, 
propeller pumps, turbine pumps and submersible pumps. Centrifugal pumps are 
widely used in pumping water. They are simple in construction, easy to operate, low 
in intial cost and produce a constant steady discharge. Generally they are used to lift 
water for a total head of 4 meters to 60 meters. Propeller pump is used for low head 
(generally less than 4 meters). It is used for lifting water from water course, drain, pond, 
river etc. It is also relatively simple in fabrication, care and repair. When the depth of 
water table is more than the practical reach of centrifugal pump or the water table is 
fluctuating, then submersible pump or turbine pump is used. Both turbine pumps as 
well as submersible pumps have high initial cost, difficult to install and difficult to repair 
as compard to centrifugal pumps.
(a) Selection

Total head and discharge expected from the pump to irrigate a particular area 
is calculated and then the pump is selected which has the best efficiency at the 
above head and discharge conditions. Reputed pump manufacturers furnish the 
characteristic, curves or catalogues giving summary of important characteristics of 
their pumps. Pumps made by different manufacturers may vary considerably in their 
prices, adaptibility and efficiency. The pumps have efficiencies from 50 to 70 per 
cent. Good pumps with the highest possible efficiency should, therefore, be chosen. 
Regarding efficiency, ISI and Punjab quality mark pump can be relied upon.

157



	 While purchasing the pump, the farmer should have the following information:
•	 Source of water supply (open well, tubewell, canal etc.)
•	 Water table depth in the area.
•	 Crops to be sown.
•	 Total area under crops.
•	 Discharge required.
•	 Type of Prime-mover (engine or motor). In case of electric motor, the hours of 

electric supply.
•	 Location of tubewell in the farm.
•	 Type of drive (Belt drive, direct coupled, monoblock).
•	 Water conveyance system (lined or unlined or underground pipeline).
•	 Ground water quality in the area.
(b) Instructions for Efficient Use of Pumps 
•	 The centrifungal pump should be installed at 1 to 2 m above the water level.
•	 Select a proper pump by consulting the different performance tables or charts from 

the dealer.
•	 Use large radius bends.
•	 Keep the height of delivery pipe at the minimum possible height above the ground 

level.
	 (a) 	Use proper material of joint dori.
	 (b) 	Fix joint dori in such a way that it leaks about 15-20 drops per minute.
	 (c) 	Put the joint dori in pieces equal to circumference of pump shaft. The ends of 

each piece should be staggered.
•	 Servicing and annual overhauling of the pump set should be done as per 

manufacturer’s instructions.
•	 To avoid leakage in joints, tighten the joints properly using good quality gaskets.
•	 The pump must be run at the recommended revolutions.
•	 Use proper quality of driving belts, in case of belt driven pumps.
•	 Use proper size of suction and delivery pipes according to discharge.
•	 Use good quality reflax valve whose flap should open fully.
•	 Foundation should be pucca, levelled and with bolts embedded in it.
•	 Align the motor and pump pulley accurately.
(c) Gas Problem in Tubewell Pits 

In some areas, accummulation of gas (mainly carbon dioxide gas) has been found 
in the lower portion of the tubewell pit. When one goes into the pit for repair of pump, 
he feels difficulty in respiration and becomes unconscious after a few minutes. If one 
experiences such conditions, he should immediately come out of the pit. For testing 

158



the gas, one can burn a kerosene lamp and slowly lower it in the pit, wherever it blows 
off means that below that point there is carbon dioxide gas. This can be removed by 
using the following measures:
•	 One can use an exhaust fan lowered up to bottom of the pit and keep the exhaust 

fan on the ground surface and attach a PVC pipe up to bottom of it.
•	 One can use an empty juite bag or bucket or umbrella and move it up and down in 

the pit to remove the gas.
•	 If the pump is loaded by belt, run the pump idle for 15 minutes and the gas is 

pushed out.
•	 After using these measures, one should re-test the gas accumulation with the 

kerosene lamp before going down in the pit  for repairs, etc.
(d)  Efficient use of Irrigation Water 
•	 Methods of irrigation are Flooding (Kiara), Furrow, Sprinkler and Drip method. 

Flooding (Kiara) method is most commonly used by the farmers for irrigating cereal 
crops. For proper utilisation of irrigation water, it is necessary that most water 
applied in the field should be stored in the root zone of the crop. This depends 
upon soil type, field slope, field size, discharge and crop. To have better use of 
applied water, irrigation method should be properly selected. At present, irrigation 
application efficiency is 30 to 40% which can be increased to 60 to 70% by adopting 
proper method of irrigation.

•	 Furrow method of irrigation is suitable for sunflower crop in all types of soils. 
Sprinkler method can be used on sand dunes, light soils and where water is scarce. 
However, the system has high initial cost. The recommended plot sizes (Kiara) 
under different field conditions for flooding method of irrigation are as given below.

•	 For light, medium and heavy soils, the recommended slopes are 0.4, 0.3 and 0.15 
per cent respectively i.e., the difference in levels at the two ends of an acre field 
should be 9.6, 7.2 and 3.6 inches respectively. Further, for tubewell delivery size of 
3”-4” (7.5-10 litres per sec) and 6” (20 litres per sec), the  number  of border strips 
(Kiara) per acre should be 16, 10, 8 and 10, 5, 4 respectively  for light, medium 
and heavy soils. For  Mogha  discharge  of 30 litres  per  sec the number of border 
strips (Kiara) per acre should be 7, 4, 3 respectively for light, medium and heavy 
soils.

159



APPENDIX- IV
FERTILIZER SOURCES FOR THE SUPPLY OF PLANT NUTRIENTS

(A) Nutrient Content (%) in Different Fertilizers
Fertilizers N P2O5 K2O Others
Ammonium Sulphate 20.5 — — —
Ammonium Chloride 25 — — —
Urea 46 — — —
Superphosphate — 16 — 12(S)
Diammonium Phosphate 18 46 — —
Urea Ammonium Phosphate 28 28 — —
Nitrophosphate 20 20 — —
Sulphated Phosphorus 13 33 0 15 (S)
Sulphate of Potash — — 48 —
Muriate of Potash — — 60 —
Manganese Sulphate — — — 30 (Mn)
Zinc Sulphate (Heptahydrate) — — — 21 (Zn)
Zinc Sulphate (Monohydrate) — — — 33 (Zn)
Ferrous Sulphate — — — 19 (Fe)
Copper Sulphate — — — 24 (Cu)
Gypsum — — — 16(S)
FYM (oven dry) 0.5-1.5 1.2-1.8 1.2.2.0 Sufficient

(B) Quantity of the Fertilizer to give 1 kg of Nutrient

For 1 kg of N
Ammonium Chloride 4 kg
Ammonium Sulphate 5 kg
Urea 2.2 kg
For 1 kg of P2O5
Superphosphate 6.2 kg
Diammonium Phosphate 2.2 kg
Urea Ammonium Phosphate 3.6 kg
Nitrophosphate 5.0 kg
Sulphated Phosphate 3.4 kg
For 1 kg of K2O
Muriate of Potash 1.7 kg

Note: Urea-Ammonium Phosphate (28:28) Nitrophosphate (20:20) and Diammonium Phosphate (18:46) contains 
both nitrogen and phosphorus. One kg of Phosphorus (P2O5) added through these fertilizers also supplies one 
kg of nitrogen (N) in the case of Urea-Ammonium Phosphate and Nitrophosphate and 0.4 kg N in the case of 
Diammonium Phosphate. This must be taken into account while using these three fertilizers.
Well rotten FYM contains 40-50% moisture. Each ton of such FYM supplies N,P and K equivalent to 4 kg Urea, 
10 kg Superphosphate and 6 kg Muriate of Potash. So reduce the fertilizer dose accordingly.

160



APPENDIX- V
GRAIN STORAGE AND MANAGEMENT OF STORED GRAIN INSECTS

1. Storage of Wheat
(a) Home consumption: Improved storage structures of various capacities are now 

available. For indoor use, PAU metal bins of 1.6, 3.5, 7.5, 10 and 15 quintal capacity 
are available. The air-tight bin is so constructed that it does not allow entry of any 
outside insects and rodents and the insects present in the grain do not get favourable 
atmosphere to develop. It is also economical, portable and simple to fabricate.

For filling and using the PAU metal bin, the following storage practices are 
recommended:
(i) 	 Clean the bin thoroughly and do not allow the left-overs of the previously-

stored grains to remain in the bin. Inspect the covers to ensure that the gaskets 
are intact.

(ii) 	 Clean and sort the grains of all impurities. Broken kernels and other impurities 
lead to insect attraction and, hence, should be separated.

(iii) 	 Do not mix the new grains with old stock as the latter may be infested with 
insects.

(iv)	 Never store infested grains, or grains with high moisture content. Dry the 
grains out in the sun, cool it and fill in the bin later in the evening. The moisture 
content of the grains should not be higher than 9 per cent. 

(v) 	 Fill-in the bin to full capacity and tight the lid properly.
(vi) 	 Do not open the bin for the first 30 days and thereafter open it fortnightly. The 

cover should be replaced immediately after use.
(vii) 	 Inspect the grains frequently.

(b) Commercial Purposes: For storing wheat for commercial purposes, the 
farmers should make use of the facilities provided by the following agencies.
(i)	 State Warehousing Corporation in the State and its regional offices.
(ii) 	Central Warehousing Corporation and its regional offices.

2. Management of Stored Grain Insects
Pests and Symptoms of attack: Twenty species of insects infest grains in the 

Punjab.   Khapra beetle (Trogoderma granarium), lesser grain-borer (Rhizopertha 
dominica) rice weevil (Sitophilus oryzae) and flour beetles (Tribolium spp.) are serious 
pests of wheat jowar, rice barley and maize.  Mung dhora (Callosobruchus analis), 
gram dhora (C. chinensis) and cowpea dhora (C. maculatus) attack different pulses.  
Grain moth (Sitotroga cerealella) attacks wheat, maize, jowar, oats, barley grains 
which lose nutritive value and germinating capacity, besides loss in weight.

161



Recommendations 
Preventive measures
1. Dry the grains properly before storage.
2.  Plug all cracks, crevices and holes in the godowns thoroughly.
3. Store new grains in the clean godowns or receptacles.
4. Use new gunny bags.
5. Disinfect empty godowns or receptacles by spraying 0.05% malathion emulsion 

(100 mL Malathion 50 EC in 10 litres of water) on the floor, walls and ceiling or 
fumigate the godowns using 25 tablets of aluminium phosphide per 100 cum of 
empty space before storing the grains.  Exposure 7 days. 

6. 	 Against dhora, cover the pulses stored in bulk with 7 cm layer of sand or sawdust 
or dung ash. 

Curative measures
1. 	 Phostoxin or Delicia or Celphos (aluminium phosphide) one tablet of 3 g per tonne 

or 25 tablets per 100 cum space.  Exposure 7 days.
Caution/limitation 
- 	 Before storing, the metal bins should be cleaned and placed in the sun for 2-3 

days.
- 	 Grains stored in metal bin also get infested if not treated with any insecticide.  

Control this infestation by giving fumigation.
- 	 Where there is infestation of Khapra, use double the dose of aluminium phosphide. 
- 	 The fumigant should be only used in air-tight stores or under tarpaulins in the open 

by specially trained persons because these fumigants are deadly poisonous.

162



APPENDIX- VI
AGRICULTURAL ACCIDENTS - PREVENTIVE AND CURATIVE 

MEASURES

1. First-aid precautions during spraying accidents
In case of pesticide poisoning, call a physician immediately.  Awaiting the physician’s 

arrival apply the FIRST-AID.
a. Swallowed Poisons
•	 Remove poison from the patient’s stomach immediately by inducing vomitting. 

Give one teaspoonful (15 g) common salt  in a glass of warm water (emetic) and 
repeat until the vomit fluid is clear. Gentle stroking or touching the throat with a 
finger or placing the blunt end of a spoon will help induce vomitting when the 
stomach is full of fluid.

•	 If the patient is already vomitting, do not give common salt.
•	 Do not induce vomitting if the patient is in a coma.
b. Inhaled poisons
•	 Carry the patient (do not let him walk) to fresh air immediately.
•	 Open all doors and windows.
•	 Loosen all tight clothing.
•	 Apply artificial respiration if breathing has stopped or is irregular.  Avoid vigorous 

application of pressure to the chest.
•	 Cover the patient with a blanket.
•	 Keep the patient as quiet as possible.
•	 If the patient is convulsing, keep him in bed in some dark room.
•	 Avoid any jarring noise.
•	 Do not give alcohol in any form.
c. Skin Contamination
•	 Drench the skin with water (giving shower with a hose or pump).
•	 Apply a stream of water to the skin while removing the clothing.
•	 Cleanse the skin thoroughly with soap and water.
•	 Rapid washing is most important for reducing the extent of injury.
d. Prevention of Collapse
•	 Cover the patient with a light blanket.

163



•	 Raise the feet of the patient on the bed.
•	 Apply elastic bands to arms and legs.
•	 Give strong tea or coffee.
•	 Give fluid administration of normal saline intravenously.
•	 Give blood or plasma transfusion.
e. Eye Contamination
•	 Hold eyelids open.
•	 Wash the eyes gently with stream of running water immediately.A delay of even a 

few seconds greatly increases the extent of injury.
•	 Continue washing until the physician arrives.
•	 Do not use chemicals. They may increase the extent of the injury.
2. Snake Bite Preventions

In snake infested regions long trousers, high shoes or leggings and gloves should 
be worn. Most important is to look where one steps while walking.

First  Aid: Re-assurance and complete rest to the victim to retard the absorption of 
venom. A wide tournaquet (or any piece of cloth) should be placed a few centimeters 
above the site of bite. It should be tight to an extent that a finger should pass below 
it with difficulty. Suction of venom should be done by giving a 1 cm linear and 1/2 
cm deep incision at the mark of the fangs after applying an antiseptic lotion. Suction 
should preferably be done with rubber bulb, breast pump or with mouth after ensuring 
that there is no oral lesion. It should be continued for about an hour. If done promptly 
50% of the venom can be removed.
3. Honey Bee and Wasp Bites
•	 Cooling of the part with ice pads.
•	 Removal of stings.
•	 Cleaning with soap and water.
•	 Local and systemic anti allergics to be given.
•	 Perfumes and bright colours attract these insects and should be avoided.
•	 Sensitive person can have severe anaphyllatic shock with even a single bite.
•	 Every such patient must get the medical aid from a doctor.
4. Electric Injuries-Preventions

Education of electric hazards to everybody, proper installation of electric appliances, 
grounding of telephone lines, radio and television arials, use of rubber gloves and dry 
shoes when working with electric circuits.

164



First  Aid: Prompt switching off the current, if possible. Immediate removal of the 
victim from the contact with the current without directly touching him. Rescurer should 
use a rubber sheet, a leather belt, a wooden pole or any other non conductive material 
to detach him.
5. Safety Precautions During Threshing
•	 Don’t wear loose clothes, wrist watch etc. while working on a thresher.
•	 Never operate thresher under the influence of intoxicants like opium, liquor, etc.
•	 For safety, the minimum length of the feeding chute should be kept 90 cm covered 

upto a minimum of 45 cm and inclined to a horizontal at an angle of 5 to 10 degrees. 
The angle of the covered portion with the base length of feeding chute should be 
kept equal to 5 degrees.

•	 A person is advised not to work on a thresher for more than 10 hours a day.
•	 Do not indulge in talking or any other distraction while working on the thresher.
•	 Avoid feeding ear heads (ghundian) as it may lead to serious hand injuries. Wet 

crop should also not be fed as it is bound to lead to fire accident. Take special care 
while feeding the damaged or short stalked crop.

•	 The exhaust pipe of the tractor should be fixed vertically upward and not under the 
tractor.

•	 The main switch of the electrical motor should be within the reach of the operators 
to switch off the current at the time of emergency. At the same time it should be 
ensured that layout of electrical wiring should not hinder the operational movement 
of workers.

•	 Do not cross over the belt or move near it.
•	 Keep a fire control equipment and first aid box for use in the event of need.

6. Safely Precautions During Tractor-Trolley use
•	 Purchase tractor with driver’s safety structure to make operator safe during roll 

back of tractor.
•	 Use Triangular Reflector (Slow Moving Vehicle Emblem) on tractors, trolleys, carts 

etc.
•	 Do not load trolleys to oversize (width) while transporting wheat straw (turi), cotton 

sticks etc. Use proper lighting system and reflectors (mirror) while transporting 
above said bulky materials.

•	 Tractor used for trailer should also be weight blasted at the front axle to make it 
stable to check rearward rolling.

•	 When tractor-trailer moving up the slope, do not disengage the gear otherwise 
trailer may pull back tractor during gear change.

•	 Be careful while crossing un-manned railway crossing.

165



7. Safety Precautions During Chaff Cutting 
•	 Purchase chaff-cutter with safety features like flywheel lock and cover on blade, fly 

wheel, gearbox, shafts, pulleys and belts etc.
•	 Feeding chute of chaff cutter should be 90 cm long and 45 cm cover on top with a 

warning roller in it.
•	 A reversal gear mechanism should be provided and located near the worker to 

stop or reverse the speed in emergency.
•	 The chaff cutter should be installed with firm foundation, in shade with sufficient 

space and lighting arrangement.
8. Safety Precautions to Avoid Fire Accidents
•	 To avoid fire accident the silencer of tractor or engine should be up in vertical 

direction.
•	 Threshing and collection of crop should be away from high-tension electric wires. 

The wires should be high enough so that the combine harvester with hood may 
pass safely.

•	 The arrangement of water (tubewell or canal) or heap of sand should be available 
near the site to control fire.

•	 Do not burn wheat straw to vacate field and use straw combines to make turi (dry 
fodder).

166



MONETARY COMPENSATION FOR ACCIDENT VICTIMS
Punjab State Marketing Board   (Mandi Board) provide financial help to all the 

farmers, their family members and labourers while 
•	 Working on agricultural implements in the field.
•	 Digging of well or electrocution while operating tubewell on the farm.
•	 Using pesticides or due to snake bite in the field.
•	 Use of implements in the notified market committees in Punjab.

Mandi Board Rates of Monetary aid to Accident Victims:
Type of injury Rate of monetary aid (Rs.)
Loss of life 2,00,000/-

Loss of two limbs i.e. hands, arms, legs, feet etc. 60,000/-
Loss of one limb i.e. hand, arm, leg,  foot etc. 40,000/-
Loss of four fingers i.e. equivalent to 40,000/-
amputation of one body part.
Loss of finger/finger parts equivalent to 10,000/-
amputation of complete finger
Physical disability (more than 25%) 50,000/- to 1,00,000/-

Application Procedure for Monetary Help
In Mandi Board, victim or the nearest successor has to submit prescribed 

application within 30 days of accident or with a justification in case of delay. The 
performa includes personal detail of the victim, details of accident and level of injury. 
This performa is to be verified by the Sarpanch and two members of village Panchayat 
or by the Municipal Commissioner in case of jurisdiction of municipal committee. He/
she has to submit a police report of the accident and also a verification report by the 
Sub-Divisional Magistrate, Patwari and Tehsildar. Regarding medical treatment and 
loss, verification is accepted only from registered or qualified doctor. The victim has 
to submit an affidavit mentioning that monetary relief is not being sought from any 
other agency.

167



APPENDIX- VII
ANTIDOTES FOR PESTICIDES FOR HUMAN BEINGS

Signs and Symptoms of Toxicity 
Inhalation      Usually appear within 1/2 hour of exposure, maximum after 6 hours. Nausea and 

vomiting, running nose, feeling of chest tightness, excessive salivation, difficulty in 
respiration, frothing from mouth, headache, giddiness, vertigo.

Oral intake Nausea and vomiting, abdominal cramps, diarrhoea, muscle twitching, confusion 
and disorientation, salivation and frothing, profused sweating, diminished vision, 
pin-point pupils, respiratory difficulty, convulsions, coma, death.

I. Insecticides
Organochlorines  No  specific  antidote.  For convulsions :  Diazepam 10 mg intravenous (I/V). Could 
(lindane etc.) be repeated upto 30-40  mg.  Phenobarbitone 100-300 mg in drip. 
Organophosphates Atropine: 2-4 mg intravenous as a first dose.   If no effect double dose  may be  
(monocrotophos, given  every  10  minutes  till  atropinization.  Maintain upto  24-48 hours.  2-PAM: 
chlorpyriphos, 1- 2  g   I/V  as  5%  solution in dextrose   to be given in 5-7 minutes or 150 mL 
methyl parathion of saline drip every 30 minute. If required it may  be repeated every hour till   the 
acephate,triazophos muscle  weakness  and  fasiculation  persists. To be continued every 6-8  hours  for  
malathion, quinlphos, 1-2   days   or   5% solution  as  infusion  @  1/2 g/hr. 2 - PAMCL:  dose  same  as 
dimethoate etc) above.   Atropine  +  2PAM:  should  be  given together as 2 PAM acts as synergist 

to atropine. + Glycopyrolate 7.5 mg in 200 mL saline in case of respiratory inf.

Carbamates Atropine: 2-4 mg I/V as a test dose.  If no effect double  dose may be given every 
(Carbaryl carbofuran 10 minute till atropinization.  Maintain upto 24-48 hours. Avoid 2 PAM.
etc.) Warning :  Do not use oxime or morphine.
Pyrethroids (cyper- Only symptomatic treatment, antihistamine are of value, if large amounts are  
methrin, fenvalerate, ingested to cause nervous infestation,  pentabarbitone (0.7g/day)/diazepam 5-10 
deltamethrin etc). mg for convulsions be used. For diarrohoea treat by atropine.
Cartap Dimercaprol (BAL) 3-4 mg/kg body weight. (Comes as 3 mL, 10%   solution 
hydrochloride (Padan, alongwith benzyl benzoate in   arachis   oil). Given   deep intra muscular every 4 
Caldan etc) hours for 2 days and then twice for another 10 days.
Aluminium  phosphide No specific antidote. Give activated charcoal slurry with  sorbitol 50-100 g orally, 
(celphos. phostoxin etc) diazepam  5-10 mg I/V slowly over 2-3 minutes.  Phenobarbitone 600-1200 mg.diluted 

in 60 mL noral saline.   Maximum dose 1-2 g. Dimercaprol (BAL). Magnesium 
 sulphate 3g I/V bolus followed by 6 g in 12 hours for 5-7 days. Administering 5% 

glucose I/V can minimize liver and kidney damage. + Dopamine - 4.6 micrograms/
kg/min i/v to treat Hypotension. 
Warning: Do not give water or water based drinks

 Naturalyte No specific antidote. Treat symptomatically
(Spinosad)
Oxadiazine No specific antidote. Treat sympotmatically
(Indoxacarb)
Phenyl Parazole No specific antidote. Treat symptomatically
(fipronil)
Neonicotinoids No specific antidote. Treat symptomatically
(thiamethoxam etc.)
II Fungicides

168



Carbendazim Atropine: 2-4 mg I/V as a test dose.  If no effect double dose  may  be  given  every  
(Bavistin, Agrozim, 10  minute  till  atropinization.  Maintain upto 24-48 hours. 
Parazim, Derosal etc.)
Streptocycline Injection  of  adrenalin, antihistamine and cartisone in case of acute anaphylactic 

shock, high or low blood pressure, profuse respiration and urticaria.
Copper  oxychloride Dimercaprol (BAL) 3-4 mg/kg body weight. Comes   as 3 mL, given deep  
Copper sulphate intramuscular every 4 hours for 2 days and then twice for another 10 days. + Sod. 
(Blitox etc.) Bicarbonate 44-88 meq/lit. + D-penicillamine - 0.5 g 6 hrly before meals for 5 days.
Edifenphos Atropine: 2-4 mg I/V as a test dose.  If no effect double dose may be given every 
(Hinosan) 10 minutes till atropinization.  
Iprobenphos Maintain upto 24-48 hours. 2-PAM: 1-2g I/V as 5%  solution in dextrose to be given 
(Kitazin) in 5-7 minutes or 150 mL of saline drip every 30 minutes.   If required it may be 

repeated every hour if the muscle weakness and   fasiculation   persists.   To be 
continued every  6-8 hours for 1-2 days or  5% solution as infusion @ 1/2 g/hr.

Methoxy  ethyl Activated charcoal, egg white or 5% sodium bicarbonate solution (gastric lavage).  
mercuric chloride High colonic irritation:  5% sodium formaldehyde sulfoxylate (fresh 100 - 200  mL)     
(MEMC),  Agallol, intravenous.   For f aster   treatment    sodium citrate,  oral 1 - 4 g every  4 hours.  
Ceresan etc. For  spasms 100 mL (10%) calcium gluconate intravenous. BAL - i/m Inj 2.5-3 mg/

kg every 4 hours for 2 days then BD for 7-10 days.
Mancozeb, Ascorbic acid (vitamin C) intravenous @ 0.2 g/min.
Thiram, Zineb
Ridomil MZ (8% No specific antidote for metalaxyl.   Antidote for mancozeb   as     given   above 
metalaxyl + 64% mancozeb) metalaxyl+64% may  be recommended as this  combination contains 
mancozeb) 64%  mancozeb.
Triadimifon (beylton), No  specific  antidote,  gastric  lavage  with 5% sodium (Bayleton) bicarbonate. No 
Dinocap (karathane) specific antidote.  Gastric lavage with Karathane) 5%   sodium   bicarbonate and 

medicinal charcoal  suspension. Then give  15-30  g  sodium  sulphate in half litre 
of water.

Carboxin (Vitavax) Treat symptomatically
Captan (Captaf) If ingested, induce vomiting by administering a spoon-ful of salt in hot  water.

Chlorothalonil Treat  symptomatically
(Kavach)
Propiconazole (Tilt) Treat symptomatically
Wettable sulphur If chemical has gotten into the victim’s eyes, flush eyes with plenty of water for 
(Sultaf) atleast  5 minutes
III. Herbicides

Anilophos (Arozin, Atropine: 2-4 mg I/V as a test dose.  If no effect double dose may be  given every 
Libra, Anilguard) 10 minute till atropinization.  Maintain upto 24-48 hours. 2-PAM: 1-2 g intravenous  

as 5% solution in dextrose to be given in 5-7 minutes or 150 mL of  Anilfos Padigard 
etc.) saline drip every 30 minutes.  If required it may be repeated every hour if the 
muscle weakness and fasiculation persists. To be continued every 6-8 hours for 1-2 
days or 5% solution as infusion @ 1/2g/hr. 2-PAMCL: dose same as above. Gastric 
lavage with 5% sodium bicarbonate.

2,4-D Ingestion:  Gastric lavage with activated charcoal slurry. For muscle and  cardiac 
irritability give Lidocaine 50-100 mg intravenous, followed by  1-4 mg/minas needed.  
Alkalize urine by sodium bicarbonate 10-15 g  daily intravenously.

Glyphosate Ingestion: immediately dilute by swallowing milk  (Roundup) or water.

169



Isoproturon (Arelon, Flush eyes with soap.  Wash skin with soap and water.
Delron Milron etc.)
Paraquat Induce vomiting unless unconscious. Give gastric lavage with one litre of   30%  
(Grammoxone) aqueous suspension with Fuller’s earth together with magnesium sulphate.  Repeat 

administration until Fuller’s earth is seen in stool. 
IV. Rodenticides
Zinc phosphide (Ratol, As under aluminium phosphide
Zinc-Tox etc.)
Coumatetralyl (Racu- Vitamin ‘K’ under medical supervision
min)
Bromadiolone Vitamin ‘K’ under medical supervision.

Some common trade names of antidotes
Diazepam Calmpose, Lori, Paciquil, Tenil, Valium
Phenobarbitone Gardenal
Dimercaprol Inj. BAL (Knoll Pharma)
PAM             Neopam, Pam, Pamplus, Pam-A-Korea
Atropinisation  includes 
1. Drying up of secretions i.e. dry mouth, no frothing, loss of  sweating.
2. Tachycardia: Pulse should be maintained at about 110/minute
3. Dilated pupils
4. Hyperthermia

 Sources of Information 
(a)  Farm Chemicals Handbook, 1994
(b) Health hazards of Pesticides and its management (1996)  

Voluntary Health Association of India
(c) Essentials of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology (1999) by Narayan Reddy

(d) National Poison Information Centre, AIIMS, New Delhi

Caution:  Antidotes are to be used in case of poisoning only, for which a physician must be consulted 
immediately.

DISCLAIMER 
The information given is only advisory.  Actual selection 
of antidote, dose and manner of administration is to be 

decided by the qualified physician. 
The Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana 

accepts no legal responsibility.

170



APPENDIX- VIII
ADDITIONAL GUIDELINES FOR WHEAT CULTIVATION IN PADDY STRAW 

MANAGED FIELDS
General
•	 The operator of different machines for straw management (like Super SMS, 

Happy Seeder, Smart Seeder, Super Seeder, Chopper/Mulcher, Mould-
board Plough, etc.) should be fully trained. The training can be taken from 
Punjab Agricultural University or Krishi Vigyan Kendras.

•	 All techniques to manage paddy straw in field can be used in medium and 
heavy textured soils but in light textured soils, prefer straw incorporation.

•	 Grow recommended short to medium duration rice varieties, which provide 
more time for straw management, facilitate sowing and minimise pink stem 
borer infestation in succeeding wheat crop due to less straw load.

Guidelines for paddy cultivation preceding wheat crop
•	 Make at least 2 plots of an acre before transplanting of paddy as it is difficult 

to make plots in Happy Seeder and Smart Seeder sown wheat. 
•	 Regular monitoring of paddy crop should be done in the months of Sep-

tember-October. If the attack of rice ear cutting caterpillar (armyworm of 
wheat) or pink stem borer is observed, adopt recommended practices for 
their management to check their carry-over to wheat.

•	 Use of Mulcher before Smart Seeder/Super Seeder is not necessary.
•	 In fields with heavy soil having high straw load, avoid use of Mulcher before 

Happy Seeder. 
Wheat sowing using Happy Seeder, Smart Seeder and Super Seeder 
•	 The last irrigation to paddy crop should be planned in such a way that 

proper moisture remains in soil at the time of sowing of wheat with Happy 
Seeder/Smart Seeder/Super Seeder. 

•	 Depth of sowing in case of Happy Seeder/Super Seeder should be be-
tween 1.5 to 2.0 inches.

•	 In case of sowing with Happy Seeder, use 5 kg more seed per acre of 
wheat than recommended for conventional sowing except for PBW 869.

•	 Drill 55 kg DAP per acre at sowing of wheat. Apply 45 kg urea per acre 
before first and second irrigation. It is cautioned that in heavy textured soils 
to avoid delay in urea application due to delay in second irrigation, give two 
foliar sprays of 10% urea solution (20 kg urea in 200 litre water per acre) at 
42 and 54 days after sowing. 

171



•	 Care should be taken that there is no clogging of seed and fertilizer tubes 
of Happy Seeder/Smart Seeder/Super Seeder. Tap the tubes with a stick to 
remove clogging, if required. 

•	 If pink stem borer/rice ear cutting caterpillar damage is observed in previ-
ous paddy crop, avoid sowing wheat in the month of October.

•	 In light textured soils, where wheat is sown with Happy Seeder/ Smart 
Seeder first irrigation should be light and applied at 25-30 days after sow-
ing and in medium to heavy textured soils apply irrigation at 30-35 days 
after sowing.  In case of wheat sown with Super Seeder, apply irrigation as 
recommended for wheat cultivated with conventional methods. Apply irriga-
tion after taking into account rainfall forecast. 

•	 Prefer to irrigate the fields during day time to maximize predation of insects 
by birds. 

•	 Regularly monitor wheat crop sown in straw managed fields in the month of 
November- December to identify the problems related to insect pests, dis-
eases or rodents and use recommended practices for their management. 

•	 Use recommended pre and post-emergence herbicides for control of weeds 
in case of crop sown with Happy Seeder/Super Seeder. Use Post emer-
gence herbicide only in case of crop sown with Smart Seeder.

Wheat sowing after straw incorporation with other machines
•	 Incorporation can be done by different methods depending upon the avail-

ability of machinery and irrigation water available with the farmer. 
•	 Chopper/Mulcher is used to chop straw into pieces and spread it in the field 

uniformly. The chopped straw can be mixed/incorporated in the soil as fol-
lows: 

i)	 After paddy harvesting, if sufficient moisture is available at the time of sow-
ing of wheat  then mix the chopped paddy straw into the soil with the help 
of Mouldboard Plough. Thereafter, prepare the field using rotavator.

ii)	 If sufficient period of 2-3 weeks is available between harvesting of paddy 
and sowing of wheat give shallow irrigation and mix the chopped straw with 
the use of Disc harrow or Rotavator.

Note: All other recommendations for straw managed wheat crop are same as 
in Package of practices for crop of Punjab for wheat cultivation.

172



APPENDIX - IX
IMPORTANT TELEPHONE NUMBERS OF 

PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY, LUDHIANA
(DIAL EXCHANGE 0161-2401960 TO 2401979 FOR EXTENSION NO.)

Name/Designation Telephone Number
 Office  Mobile

Dr. Makhan Singh Bhullar 0161-2401644 98728-11350
Director Extension Education
Dr. G P S Sodhi 0161-2400429 94176-26843
Additional Director Extension Education 418 (Ext. No.)
Dr. Tarsem Singh Dhillon 0161-2401070 94640-37325
Additional Director Extension Education 214 (Ext. No.)
Dr. T S Riar 0161-2405731 98142-10269
Additional Director Communication 373 (Ext. No.) 
Dr. Rupinder Kaur --- 97797-00905
Associate Director (Skill Development)

Help Line Numbers for the Farmers   
Kisan Call Centre 1800-180-1551 (Toll Free)
Dr. Gurpreet Singh Makkar, Plant Clinic 417  81464-00248

Dr. B S Gill, Plant Breeding & Genetics 435 98721-63567

Dr. Amarjit Singh, Plant Pathology 505 94637-47280

Dr. R S Chandi, Entomology 504 81460-39400

Dr. Amit Kaul, Agronomy 401 81464-00233

Dr. Gobinder Singh, Soil Science 506 95011-92500

Dr. Ruma Devi, Vegetable Science 452 98783-99555

Dr. Jaswinder Singh Brar, Fruit Science 303 99158-33793

Dr. Mahesh Narang,Farm Machinery & Power Engineering 446 94173-83464

Dr. Arashdeep Singh, Food Science and Technology 305 98762-35555

Dr. Jugraj Singh, Soil & Water Engineering 284 98155-47607

Dr. Raj Kumar, Economics & Sociology 461 81460-96600

Dr. Tarsem Chand, Processing & Food Engineering 384 97790-00640

173



Dr. Simrat Singh, Landscaping & Floriculture 440 98157-93196

Dr. Dharminder Singh, Extension Education 321 98726-12124

Dr. Neena Singla, Rodent Management 382 93573-25446

Dr. Tejdeep Kaur Kler, Bird Management 382 99559-65904

Seed Shop 419 ---

Phone Number of Heads of Various Departments

Plant Breeding & Genetics 224 

Wheat Section 250

Cotton Section 334 

Maize Section 437 

Oilseed Section 433 

Pulses Section 413 

Fodder Section 443 

Entomology 320 

Plant Pathology 319 

Agronomy 308 

Soil Science 317 

Vegetable Science 370 

Fruit Science 303

Landscaping & Floriculture 440 

Extension Education 321

Farm Machinery & Power Engineering 257 

Economics & Sociology 301/461 

Microbiology 330 

Rats & Birds Control 429

174



Associate/Deputy Directors of Krishi Vigyan Kendras
Dr. Bikramjit Singh (Incharge), Amritsar 0183-2505672 98723-54170

Dr. Gurdeep Singh, Bathinda 0164-2912011 88722-00121

Dr. Rakesh Kumar (Incharge), Faridkot 01639-253142 94175-29677

Dr. Hardeep Singh (Additional Charge), Fatehgarh Sahib 01763-221217 81468-60099

Dr. Gurmail Singh, Ferozepur 01632-279517 81462-60400

Dr. Sarbjit Singh Aulakh, Gurdaspur 01874-220743 94640-70131

Dr. Maninder Singh Bons (Incharge), Hoshiarpur --- 98157-51900

Dr. Sanjeev Kataria, Jalandhar 01826-292053 99889-01590

Dr. Vipan Kumar Rampal (Additional Charge), Ludhiana 01628-261597 81465-70699

Dr. Harinder Singh (Incharge), Kapurthala 01822-233056 97800-90300

Dr. Gurdeep Singh (Additional Charge), Mansa 01652-280843 88722-00121

Dr. Kamaldeep Singh, Moga --- 98882-05158

Dr. Karamjit Sharma, Sri Muktsar Sahib --- 98722-17368

Dr. Bikramjit Singh (Additional Charge), Pathankot 0186-2920895 98733-54170

Dr. Hardeep Singh, Patiala 0175-2225473 81688-60099

Dr. Satbir Singh, Ropar 01881-220460 99882-27872

Dr. Pardeep Kumar, SBS Nagar 01823-292314 95010-23334

Dr. Mandeep Singh (Incharge), Sangrur 01672-245320 70097-84182

Senior Most Extension Scientists of Farm Advisory Service Centre
Dr. Jagdish Arora, Abohar 01634-225326 81959-50560

Dr. Narinderpal Singh, Amritsar 0183-2501989 84270-07023
Dr. Amandeep Kaur, Barnala --- 94646-59995
Dr. Amarjit Singh Sandhu, Bathinda 0164-2212684 94633-71120
Dr. Manveen Kaur, Chandigarh/Mohali 0172-2775348 81460-88233
Dr. Fatehjeet Singh Sekhon, Faridkot 01639-250143 82848-00299
Dr. Jagjot Singh Gill, Ferozepur 01632-242136 82839-32427

Dr. Narinderdeep Singh, Gurdaspur 01874-220828 92762-95717

175



Dr. Charanjeet Kaur, Hoshiarpur 01882-222392 94172-87920
Dr. Maninder Singh, Jalandhar --- 81460-88488

Dr. Harinder Singh (Additional Charge), Kapurthala 01822-232543 97800-90300
Dr. Gurpreet Kaur, Patiala 0175-2200646 94633-69063
Dr. Raminder Singh Ghuman, Ropar 01881-222257 98885-21200
Dr. Ashok Kumar, Sangrur 01672-293098 95018-55223
Dr. Parvinder Singh, Tarntaran --- 81463-22553

Directorate Research
Dr. Ajmer Singh Dhatt 0161-2401221 99151-35797
Director Research 216 (Ext. No.)
Dr. G. S. Mangat 0161-2407309 98145-16464
Addl. Director Research (Agriculture) 341 (Ext. No.)
Dr. Mahesh Kumar, Addl. Director Research          --- 94786-40539
(Agricultural Engineering)
Dr. Amandeep Singh 438 81465-70699
Associate Director (Seed) (Ext. No.)
Dr. Balkaran Singh Gill 253 81469-00244
Deputy Director (Farm) (Ext. No.)

Regional Research Station/Seed Farm
Abohar 01634-225326

Bathinda 0164-212159; 97800-24223

Bahadurgarh (Patiala) 0175-2381473

Faridkot 01639-251244

Gurdaspur 01874-220825; 88720-03010

Gangian (Hoshiarpur) 01883-85075; 98772-52692

Ladhowal (Ludhiana) 0161-2801566; 81463-00510

Kheri (Sangrur) 01673-285020; 70097-84182

Kapurthala 98722-04523

Amloh (Naraingarh) 94649-92257

Ballowal Saunkhri (SBS Nagar) 98880-14851

Jallowal (Lesriwal) Jalandhar 98141-37547

Usman (Tarntaran) 81463-22553

Dyal Bharang (Amritsar) 98723-54170

176